                                                                                        CMU-ITC-88-062




                              An Overview      of the Andrew File System

                                               John H Howard

                                        Information Technology Center
                                          Carnegie Mellon University


                                                  ABSTRACT

                    Andrew is a distributed computing environment being developed in a joint pro-
            ject by Carnegie Mellon University and IBM. One of the major components of
            Andrew is a distributed file system. The goal of the Andrew File System is to support
            growth up to at least 7000 workstations (one for each student, faculty member, and
            staff at Carnegie Mellon) while providing users, application programs, and system
            administrators with the amenities of a shared file system. This overview describes the
            environment, design, and features of the file system, and ends with a summary of how
             it "feels" to end users and to system administrators.


    1. History and Goals
    The Information Technology Center was started in 1982. It grew out of a task force report on the
    future of computing at Carnegie Mellon, which recommended that the University move to a distributed
    computing system based on powerful personal workstations and a networked "integrated computing
-   environment" to tie them together. Overall project goals included advancement of the state of the art
    in distributed computing, establishing a new model of computer usage, and providing sufficient accessi-
    bility and functional richness to become an integral part of users' lives. The integrated computing
    environment was to allow local control of resources but to permit easy and widespread access to all
    existing and future computational and informational facilities on campus. Network and file system
    objectives thought to be necessary to achieve these general goals included high availability, ease of
    expansion and of incorporation of new technologies, and good performance even during peak periods,
    with graceful response to overload.
    As the project developed, five focal areas emerged: the workstation hardware and operating system, the
    network, the file system, the user interface, and the message system. This overview deals with the file
    system, with some passing references to the workstation hardware and the network.
    It was generally agreed from the beginning that a high-function workstation should be used rather than
    a more economical but less functional tool such as a personal computer. The most important feature
    was a million pixel bit-mapped display; other characteristics (such as a 1 million instruction per second
    processor and a million bytes of main memory) were selected in proportion to the display's needs. The
    decision to use UNIX,t (specifically 4.2BSD) as an operating system was made early in the project,
    based its availability, the desire to use standard tools wherever possible, and the presence in 4.2BSD of
    desirable features such as virtual memory and networking support.
    The network consists of a mixture of Ethernets and Token Rings, tied together by bridges (sometimes
    referred to as routers). It was built up gradually by inter-connecting pre-existing departmental Ethemcts
    and gradually reorganizing the overall topology into a hierarchy, which at present consists of a campus
    backbone and a large number of local nets in the individual academic buildings. The local nets are
    connected to the backbone by fiber optic links which run from the building entry wiring closets to the
    University Computing Center building. The routers and the backbone are physically located entirely in
    t UNqX
         is atrademark
                    of BellLaboratories.
                                                        -2-


    the UCC building (and one other important academi_ building), thus greatly simplifying fault isolation ..................
    and repair.

    Given the choice of 4.2BSD, it was easy to select the DARPA TCP/IP protocols as the campus stan-
    dard. While TCP/IP was not the majority choice of any constituency at Carnegie Mellon, it was at least
    available for most of the existing computers and operating systems. Other protocols are tolerated on
    many of the network segments, but the routers operate at the IP packet level.

    2. File System Design
    The general goal of widespread accessibility of computational and informational facilities, coupled with
    the choice of UNIX, led to the decision to provide an integrated, campus-wide file system with func-
    tional characteristics as close to that of UNIX as possible. We wanted a student to be able to sit down
    at any workstation and start using his or her files with as little bother as possible. Furthermore we did
    not want to modify existing application programs, which assume a UNIX file system, in any way. Thus,
    our first design choice was to make the file system compatible with UNIX at the system call level.
    While we realized that there would be some unavoidable differences in performance, in failure modes,
    and even in some functions, we were determined to minimize them wherever possible. The few differ-
    ences will be discussed later.
    The second design decision was to use whole files as the basic unit of data movement and storage,
    rather than some smaller unit such as physical or logical records. This is undoubtedly the most contr-
    oversial and interesting aspect of the Andrew File System. It means that before a workstation can use a
    file, it must copy the entire file to its local disk, and it must write modified files back to the file system
    in their entirety. This in turn requires using a local disk to hold recently-used files. On the other hand,
    it provides significant benefits in performance and to some degree in availability. Once a workstation
    has a copy of a file it can use it independently of the central file system. This dramatically reduces net-
    work traffic and file server loads as compared to record-based distributed file systems.[SOSPll]         Furth-
    ermore, it is possible to cache and reuse files on the local disk, resulting in further reductions in server
-   loads and in additional workstation autonomy.
    Two functional issues with the whole file strategy are often raised. The first concerns file sizes: only
    files small enough to fit in the local disks can be handled. Where this matters in our environment, we
    have found ways to break up large files into smaller parts which fit. The second has to do with
    updates. Modified files are returned to the central system only when they are closed, thus rendering
    record-level updates impossible. This is a fundamental property of the design. However, it is not a
    serious problem in the university computing environment.           The main application for record-level
    updates is databases. Serious multi-user databases have many other requirements (such as record- or
    field-granularity authorization, physical disk write ordering controls, and update serialization) which are
    not satisfied by UNIX file system semantics, even in a non-distributed environment. In our view, the
    right way to implement databases is not by building them directly on the file system, but rather by pro-
    viding database servers to which workstations send queries. In practice, doing updates at a file granu-
    larity has not been a serious problem.
    The third and last key design decision in the Andrew File System was to implement it with many rela-
    tively small servers rather than a single large machine. This decision was based on the desire to sup-
    port growth gracefully, to enhance availability (since if any single server fails, the others should con-
    tinue), and to simplify the development process by using the same hardware and operating system as
    the workstations. On the other hand, we are interested in experimenting with a larger server, possibly
    based on a mainframe, to see if it were more cost-effective or easier to operate. At the present time, an
    Andrew. file server consists of a workstation with three to six 400-megabyte disks attached. We set
    (and have achieved) a price/performance goal of supporting at least 50 active workstations per file
    server, so that the centralized costs of the file system would be reasonable. In a large configuration like
    the one at Carnegie Mellon, we also use a separate "system control machine" to broadcast global
    information (such as where specific users' files are to be found) to the file servers. In a small
    configuration the system control machine is combined with a (the) server machine.
                                                                -3-


    3. Implementation            ...................
,   The Andrew File System is implemented in several parts, which are most conveniently                        explained by
    following what happens when a application program attempts to open a file.
    The file open system call, issued by the application program, is intercepted by a small "hook" installed
    in the workstation's kernel. The user's program is suspended and the intercepted request is diverted to
    a special program, implemented as a user-level process on the workstation. This program, the Andrew
    Cache Manager, forwards the file request to a file server, receives the file (if everything went well),
    stores it on the local disk, and sends back an open file descriptor via the kernel to the user's program.
    The user's program then reads and writes the file locally, without any special help from the kernel, the
    cache manager, or the file server. Eventually, the close operation is also diverted to the cache manager,
    which (if the file was modified) sends the updated copy back to the file server.
    The Andrew Cache Manager has several other important functions. It keeps copies of recently used
    files on the workstations' local disk, thus minimizing network traffic for frequently-reused files. It also
    caches directories and status information and, in fact, performs the entire directory lookup function,
    again reducing server loads. It maintains much of this status information across file server or network
    failures and even workstation restarts, simply re-validating cached information the first time it is used.
    (Once a file has been validated in this way, the server will notify the cache manager ff the file changes.)
    Most of the burden of reproducing UNIX system call semantics falls upon the Andrew Cache Manager
    as well.
    The file server consists of both hardware and software. The software consists primarily of a "file
    manager" program which runs in a single UNIX process and is internally multiprogrammed by a "light-
    weight process" package which is capable of handling several requests in parallel.
    The operations performed by the Andrew File Manager are reading, creating, or replacing files, reading
    directories, setting and releasing advisory locks, and various administrative operations. The manager
    does the following things to handle a typical operation:
      verify the identity of the user.
      check the user's permission to perform the operation.
      reserve disk space, in the case of an update operation.
      perform a bulk transfer of the requested file to or from the workstation as necessary.
      replace the old version of an updated file with the new version atomically.
      send an ending status to the workstation.
      keep a record of the workstation's           interest in the file, for use in future update notifications.
    Supporting programs include an "authentication         manager", an "update manager" and a "status
    manager".    The authentication manager maintains a database of users and authenticates them. The
    update manager keeps software and internal databases up to date and consistent in configurations with
    more than one file server. The status manager serves as a centralized collection point for information
    on the status of the various file servers. This strategy makes it possible for anybody to make occasional
    or even periodic status queries without overloading the actual file servers.

    4. Features
    Here are several specific aspects of the file system worth some more description.

    4.1. Authentication
    When a user logs into a workstation, the workstation goes through an authentication procedure based on
    the user's password. By authenticating in the file server we avoid depending on the workstation kernel,
    which is exposed to user modification, for authentication.   Although undue reliance on the security of
    network neighbors is not the only security weakness of distributed systems, we feel it is an important
    one.
                                                        -4-


    The authentication mechanism is automatic as far as users are concerned. It involves an exchagge of
    encrypted messages between tJae login program and the authentication manager. A successful exchange
    establishes the identity of both the user on the workstation and of the authentication manager. It pro-
    duces some "tokens" which the Andrew Cache Manager uses to establish connections to file servers as
    it needs them. These tokens can be passed on to other workstations in order to support remote login
    capabilities. Tokens time out after 25 hours in order to provide some control over the possibility of
    their being stolen.
    Two new utility commands have been provided to make authentication more convenient: log re-
    authenticates a user (for example if the tokens have timed out), and unlog discards the tokens, thus
    rendering the workstation safe for use by other individuals. It is common to execute an unlog com-
    mand when logging out from a workstation.

    4.2. Access Lists
    We felt that the traditional 12-bit access mode flags of UNIX were inadequate for a campus-wide file
    system, so we supplemented them by an access list mechanism. An access list specifies various users
    (or groups of users) and, for each of them, specifies the class of operations they may perform. Access
    lists are associated with directories. The operations they specify are:
      read any file in the directory
      write (update) any file in the directory
      insert new files in the directory
      delete files from the directory
      lookup files in the directory
      lock files in the directory
      administer the directory (that is, change the access list)
    The standard UNIX bits are retained as well, with both conventional and access list permission required
    to operate on a file. Thus the standard commands such as chmod work as specified (although with
    somewhat dubious security.) The super-user has no special privileges as far as the access list mechan-
    ism is concerned.   This leads to some difficult issues in the handling of the "setuid" mechanism.
    Although we have been able to work around the problems we have encountered, this is a significant
    divergence from standard UNIX semantics,
    Access lists are displayed and changed by a user command, fs, which passes its requests through the
    cache manager to the file managers. The fs command also provides miscellaneous other operations
    including listing and controlling the user's disk space quota and other properties of the logical volume
    (see below), flushing files from the cache, finding out file locations, and general administrative func-
    tions.


    4.3. Logical Volumes
    The Andrew File System groups files into aggregates called "logical volumes".          A typical logical
    volume would be a single user's files, or a particular release of the system binary files. Logical
    volumes are interconnected by a "mount point" mechanism resembling standard UNIX mounts. End
    users seldom need to be aware of logical volumes. On the other hand, operators and system administra-
    tors are almost exclusively concerned with logical volumes rather than with individual user files, as the
    logical volume is the unit for operations like backup, load and space balancing between file servers, and
    redundant storage of read-only files.
    An important file system operation from an operator's point of view is the creation of a read-only
    snapshot, or "clone", of any logical volume. This is implemented in such a way that it is quick and
    inexpensive to make clones, so they are used in several important ways. First, new software releases
    are typically made by cloning the system binaries. Read-only clones can be replicated on multiple
_   servers, leading to significant increases in availability and performance. (At Carnegie Mellon, there are
    three servcrs devoted exclusively to read-only clones of system volumes.) Second, individual u_rs'
                                                       -5-


     logical volumes are cloned every midnight. The main reason for_this is to get a consistent snapshot
     which can then be backed up over the next day. A secondary benefit is that the clone is made available
     to each user under the name "OldFiles", so that all the user's previous day's work is available in case
     of a blunder. This significantly reduces requests to recover files from the backup tapes.

     5. End Users' Viewpoint
     The key fact about the Andrew File System from an end user's viewpoint is that it closely resembles a
     standard UNIX file system, yet allows the user to sit down at any campus workstation and get at a uni-
     form set of files. In almost all cases it is possible to ignore the distributed implementation, the
     automatic transfer of files on demand, and the caching mechanism.         Application programs imported
     from more centralized systems can be run without any modification whatsoever and will almost always
     work. The rest of this section will talk about some differences, but the reader should remember that the
     differences are exceptions rather than the rule.
     The main differences end users see relate to performance and failure modes. There is a noticeable wait
     when the workstation must fetch a large file. (At the present time the effective transfer rate is about 50
     thousand bytes per second, so a million-byte file takes 20 seconds.) Although in absolute terms this is
     reasonably fast, it is still noticeable and sometimes annoying.
     Failure modes in a distributed system are intrinsically different from those in centralized systems. The
     file system at Carnegie Mellon suffers from occasional failures in the file server hardware, the network
     connecting workstations to the file servers, and (occasionally) in the power or cooling supply to the
     entire computing center facility, or the entire campus internet. The design decision to implement the
     file system with multiple servers is rendered useless when all the servers are disabled by a power or
     cooling failure, as has happened several times. Much more common, however, are individual server
     failures. When the cache manager loses contact with a file server it goes through a one-minute timeout,
     after which it switches to a disconnected mode in which it allows cached files from that server to be
     read, but not written. If the failed server has your personal files, it won't be long before you get stuck
_-   on missing file or a write. In a few cases it is desirable to modify critical application programs, like
     text editors, to deal gracefully with the resulting error conditions. For example, it is more common for
     the close operation to fail than it is in a conventional UNIX system.
     Functionally, the main difference in the Andrew file system is its use of access lists, which we feel
     have significant advantage in both flexibility and understandability from a user's standpoint.

     6. Operators'   Viewpoint
     Unlike the user, the operator sees the Andrew file system as being very different from a standard UNIX
     file system. In fact, the main point of contact between them is that UNIX is used as the vehicle for run-
     ning the file servers. Operators do not (and in fact can no0 view or manipulate individual files directly
     when logged into file servers. (They can, of course, get at individual files through workstations if the
     access lists allow them to.) Instead, operators and system managers see the file system as a large col-
     lection of "logical volumes".    Typical operations they perform are to create, adjust, clone, move, and
     back up logical volumes. Most of these operations are highly automated. For example, there is an
     operator command move-vol which moves a volume from one file server to another. This can be done
     even when the volume is in use without significant disruption (there may be a period of a few seconds
     during which the cache manager reports to the user that the volume is busy.)
     An interesting question is that of "operating" individual workstations. The Andrew file system is neu-
     tral in this respect. There exist at least two strategies, one very centralized and one very distributed.
     The centralized strategy, which is used for most Andrew workstations today, is heavily dependent on
     the file system. Individual workstations have a minimum of locally-stored files, such as the UNIX ker-
     nel itself or the password list. When a workstation is rcbooted a special utility program selectively
     updates these few files from the central file system. The ordinary user doesn't know the super-user
     password, and all workstation software is kept up-to-date by system administrators by updating the cen-
     tral directory. At the opposite extreme is the strategy in which the workstation has a full set of local
 -   files, maintained entirely by the user, but also uses a connection to the file system for some shared
                                                  -6-


directories, This decreases dependency on the file central system, but fails to take advantage of their
benefits such as automatic backup and access to new software releases; it also requires a significantly
larger local disk.
A recent development in the Andrew file system is the introduction of a "cellular" mode whereby sub-
sets of the file servers can be administered separately and still be interconnected.  The different admin-
istrative units may even have separate user registration lists. This feature provides a new dimension of
departmental autonomy to the distributed system.

7. References
[SOSPll]    Scale and Performance     in a Distributed File System, by J.H.Howard, M.L.Kazar,
S.G.Menees, D.A.Nichols, M.Satyanarayanan, R.N.Sidebotham, and MJ.West, in Eleventh Symposium
on Operating Systems Principles, Austin, Texas, November 1987. Will appear in a future issue of the
ACM Transactions on Computer Systems.
