On Software Component Co-Installability
JÉRÔME VOUILLON, CNRS, PPS, UMR 7126, Univ Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité
ROBERTO DI COSMO, Univ Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, PPS, UMR 7126, CNRS, INRIA


Modern software systems are built by composing components drawn from large repositories, whose size
and complexity is increasing at a very fast pace. A fundamental challenge for the maintainability and the
scalability of such software systems is the ability to quickly identify the components that can or cannot
be installed together: this is the co-installability problem, which is related to boolean satisfiability and is
known to be algorithmically hard. This article develops a novel theoretical framework, based on formally
certified semantic preserving graph-theoretic transformations, that allows us to associate to each concrete
component repository a much smaller one with a simpler structure, that we call strongly flat, with equivalent
co-installability properties. This flat repository can be displayed in a way that provides a concise view of
the co-installability issues in the original repository, or used as a basis for various algorithms related to
co-installability, like the efficient computation of strong conflicts between components. The proofs contained
in this work have been machine checked using the Coq proof assistant.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: D.2.4 [Software Engineering]: Software/Program Verification—
Formal methods; G.2.2 [Discrete Mathematics]: Graph Theory—Hypergraphs
General Terms: Algorithms, Theory, Verification
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Component, dependencies, conflicts, co-installability, package manage-
ment, open source
ACM Reference Format:
Vouillon, J. and Di Cosmo, R. 2013. On software component co-installability. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
Methodol. 22, 4, Article 34 (October 2013), 35 pages.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2522920.2522927

1. INTRODUCTION
The mainstream adoption of free and open source software (FOSS) has widely popu-
larised component-based software architectures, maintained in a distributed fashion
and evolving at a very quick pace. Components are typically made available via a repos-
itory, and each of these components is equipped with metadata, such as dependencies
and conflicts, used to specify concisely the contexts in which a component can or cannot
be installed.
   A typical example of the metadata attached to a component, taken from the Debian
GNU/Linux distribution, is shown in Example 1.1: the logical language used for ex-                                        34
pressing dependencies and conflicts is quite powerful, as it allows conjunctions (symbol

This work was partially supported by the European Community’s 7th Framework Programme (FP7/2007-
2013), grant agreement no. 214898, “Mancoosi” project, and performed at the IRILL Center for Free Software
Research and Innovation in Paris, France.
This is revised and extended version of the article Di Cosmo and Vouillon [2011] presented at ESEC/FSE
2011.
Authors’ address: J. Vouillion and R. Di Cosmo, Laboratoire PPS, Case 7014, 5 rue Thomas Mann, F-75205,
Paris, France; email: jerome.vouillon@pps.univ-paris-diderot.fr; roberto@dicosmo.org.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted
without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies show this notice on the first page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute to lists, or to use any component of this
work in other works requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be requested from
Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New York, NY 10121-0701 USA, fax +1 (212)
869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.
c 2013 ACM 1049-331X/2013/10-ART34 $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2522920.2522927


         ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:2                                                                                  J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

‘,’), disjunctions (symbol ‘|’) and version constraints (the symbols ‘>=’, ‘<=’, ‘>>’ and ‘<<’
stand for the usual ≥, ≤, > and < operators).
  Example 1.1. The inter-package relationships of postfix, an Internet mail trans-
port agent in the Debian GNU/Linux distribution (http://www.debian.org) currently
reads as follows.
 1     Package: postfix
 2     Version : 2.5.5 -1.1
 3     Depends: libc6 ( >= 2.7) , libdb4 .6 , ssl - cert ,
 4        libsasl2 -2 , libssl0 .9.8 ( >= 0.9.8 f -5) ,
 5        debconf ( >= 0.5) | debconf -2.0 ,
 6        netbase , adduser ( >= 3.48) , dpkg ( >= 1.8) ,
 7        lsb - base ( >= 3.0 -6)
 8     C o n f l i c t s : libnss - db ( < < 2.2 -3) , smail ,
 9        mail - transport - agent , postfix - tls
10     Provides : mail - transport - agent , postfix - tls


   In most frameworks, determining whether a single component can be installed at all
is already an NP-Complete problem, albeit the concrete instances arising in real-world
systems, like GNU/Linux distributions, Eclipse plugins or OSGI component reposito-
ries, turn out to be tractable [Mancinelli et al. 2006; Tucker et al. 2007; Le Berre and
Parrain 2008]. For the maintenance of component repositories, though, more sophis-
ticated analyses are required. This includes identifying for each component the other
components in the repository that it absolutely needs [Abate et al. 2009], and those
that it can never be installed with [Di Cosmo and Boender 2010].
   More generally, a fundamental challenge for component-based software maintain-
ability is the study of the problem of co-installability of components, that involves
identifying and visualising the relevant sets of components that can or cannot be
installed together.
   Indeed, from a maintenance point of view, one needs to identify which components
cannot be installed together, in order to check whether these incompatibilities are
justified or due to erroneous dependencies. The dependency graph is also too rich for
end users, which are interested in having a given set of functionalities provided by some
components (for instance, they want a word processor and a Web browser) but do not
care about the additional components also installed. This is illustrated by the fact that
some package managers keep track of these additional components and automatically
remove them when they are no longer needed.
   The sheer size of current mainstream repositories, with tens of thousands of compo-
nents and hundreds of thousands of relations, makes it completely unfeasible to study
such properties of a repository directly: visualising such large graphs is both techni-
cally challenging, and of little interest, as one would need to follow recursively a large
number of dependency and conflict relations to understand how components relate to
one other.
   In this article, we develop a novel theoretical framework, based on formally certified
semantic preserving graph-theoretic transformations, that allow us to associate to each
concrete component repository a much smaller repository with a simpler structure,
but with equivalent co-installability properties. This repository is small enough that
its graphical representation gives a concise view of the co-installability issues in the
original repository, that can be detected simply by visual inspection. It can also be
used as a basis for various algorithms related to co-installability, like the efficient
computation of the strong conflicts defined in Di Cosmo and Boender [2010].
   We identified several bugs in the Debian distribution using the present work. For
instance, up to version 0.1.33, the harden-servers package, meant to prevent the
installation of unsafe packages, was in conflict with packages proftpd and sendmail

          ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:3




                                   Fig. 1. Graphical depiction of a repository.

but did not prevent the installation of the corresponding binaries which were in fact
in packages proftpd-base and sendmail-bin (the first two packages were actually
transitional packages used to ease the upgrade from a previous release).
  This article is organised as follows. Section 2 recalls the basic notions about packages
and dependencies, and overviews the repository transformation developed in the paper,
which achieves impressive results on real-world GNU/Linux distributions (Section 3).
The technical development follows: repositories are equipped with a partial order in
Section 4, put into a flattened form in Sections 5, 6, and 7, simplified by removing irrel-
evant dependencies and conflicts in Section 8, and reduced by identifying equivalent
packages in Section 9. Finally, we show how to draw a simplified graph of the kernel of
a repository in Section 11 that also explains how to compute efficiently strong conflicts.
We then present the coinst tool in Section 12 and discuss the results obtained on the
Ubuntu 10.10 distribution in Section 13. Finally, we discuss related and future works
and conclude in Section 16.

2. OVERALL APPROACH
While the concrete details may vary from one technology to the other, the core metadata
associated to component based systems always allows to express a few fundamental
properties: a component, called package in the following, may depend on a combination
of components, expressed as a conjunction of disjunctions of components, and a com-
ponent may conflict with a combination of components, expressed as a conjunction of
components.
    Extra properties like provides (e.g., postfix-tls in Example 1.1), or versioned
constraints (e.g., libc6 (>= 2.7) in Example 1.1) can be easily preprocessed out
[Mancinelli et al. 2006], so that one can focus on a core dependency system that
contains a binary symmetric conflict relation, and a dependency function D(π ) =
{{π11 , . . . , πn11 }, . . . , {π1k, . . . , πnkk }} that is satisfied when for each i at least one of the
π ij is installed.
    An example repository in this core dependency system is depicted in Figure 1, that
also introduces the graphical notation used in the article: package a has two depen-
dencies, and can be installed only if, first, either package b or package c is installed,
and second, package f is installed; package c conflicts with b and f : neither packages
b and c, nor packages c and f , can be installed simultaneously; package d depends on
package e, which in turn depends on both f and g.

2.1. Repositories
We follow the notations of earlier works [Mancinelli et al. 2006; Treinen and Zacchi-
roli 2008, Di Cosmo et al. 2006a; 2006b], that we recall here. A repository is a tuple
R = (P, D, C) where P is a finite set of packages, D : P → P(P(P)) is the dependency
function (we write P(X) for the set of subsets of X), and C, a symmetric irreflexive
relation over P, is the conflict relation. An installation I of a repository (P, D, C) is a
subset of P. An installation I is healthy when the following holds:

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:4                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

—abundance. Every package has what it needs. Formally, for every package π ∈ I, and
 for every dependency d ∈ D(π ), we have d ∩ I = ∅.
—peace. No two packages conflict, that is, C ∩ (I × I) = ∅.
We call dependency a set of packages d included in D(π ) for some package
                                                                            π ∈ P. Given
a repository (P, D, C), the number of its dependencies is counted as π∈P card(D(π )).
   Notice that the empty set ∅ is allowed by the definition: it is usually called a broken
dependency, as it makes any package containing it uninstallable, because the abun-
dance condition would be unsatisfiable for such package. Such broken dependencies are
not uncommon in real component repositories, where a package may mention among
its dependencies packages that are no longer present in the repository. We will also use
such empty dependencies to mark uninstallable packages as broken, in Section 8.4.
   One can give a logical interpretation of the dependency function and the conflict
relation. The logical variables are the packages π ∈ P. A set of packages d ∈ P(P) is
interpreted as a disjunction:
                                             
                                       d =   π.
                                                         π∈d

A set of set of packages D(π ) ∈ P(P(P)) is interpreted as a conjunction:
                                               
                                   D(π ) =      d.
                                                         d∈D(π)

A dependency function D is then interpreted as the set of formulas of the shape:
                                               π =⇒ D(π ),
where π ranges over P, which can also be written:
                                        
                               π =⇒               πi, j
                                                    1≤i≤n 1≤ j≤mi

with D(π ) = {di | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} and di = {πi, j | 1 ≤ j ≤ mi }. A conflict relation C is
interpreted as the set of formulas ¬π ∨ ¬π for (π, π ) ∈ C. A healthy installation is an
assignment which simultaneously satisfies all these formulas.
   Remark 2.1 (Circular Dependencies). It is normally recommended to avoid circular
dependencies in package repositories, as it is not possible to define a deployment order
in the presence of cycles. Nevertheless, circular dependencies pose no problem for
the theoretical treatment: packages that depend on each other are simply logically
equivalent, and will be merged into a single equivalence class by our algorithm.

2.2. Co-Installability
A package π is installable in a repository if it is included in a healthy installation I
of this repository. A set of packages  are co-installable in a repository if they are all
included in some healthy installation I of the repository.
   Checking co-installability has been shown equivalent to SAT by taking advantage of
the logical interpretation of repositories [Mancinelli et al. 2006]. However, our experi-
ence is that this problem is easy in practice: SAT-solver-based tools are currently used
routinely to identify noninstallable components on repositories that contains dozens of
thousands of packages, and hundreds of thousands of dependencies and conflicts.
   Remark 2.2. Let (P, D, C) and (P , D , C ) be two repositories. If any healthy instal-
lation I of repository (P, D, C) is a healthy installation of repository (P , D , C ), then any



       ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:5




Fig. 2. Transformations of a repository (added dependencies are in bold, dotted ones are removed in the
next phase).


co-installable set of packages  in repository (P, D, C) is a co-installable set of packages
in repository (P , D , C ).
   PROOF. Immediate.


2.3. Extracting a Co-Installability Kernel
Identifying all the sets of components that cannot be installed together is way more
complex: even if we limit ourselves to the simplest case of sets of non-co-installable
components of size 2 (also known as strong conflicts), testing all possible pairs of
packages is not a viable option, as the package number is in the tens of thousands. Even
using all the optimisations described in Di Cosmo and Boender [2010], the computation
takes almost a week on a modern workstation.
   In the present work, we lay down the essential theoretical basis and algorithmic in-
sight for tackling this non-co-installability problem: the fundamental idea is to extract
from the component repository a kernel repository which is equivalent to the original
one, as far as co-installability is concerned, but which turns out in practice to be orders
of magnitude smaller, and easily manageable.
   Looking at the example repository of Figure 1, for example, one can check that c
cannot be installed together with b and and that c cannot be installed together with
any of a, d, e and f , while g can always be installed; also, a, d, e and f are really
equivalent as far as installability is concerned: if one of them can be installed in a
given configuration, then all the others can, and vice-versa. Instead of performing
this check on the original repository, which requires following dependency chains and
performing complex case analysis, we remark that not all the information present in
the repository is relevant, and take advantage of this fact to simplify and reduce it.
   The key steps of this process are now summarised. The effect of each step on the
example repository of Figure 1 is shown in Figure 2.



ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:6                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo




                              Fig. 3. Repository that blows-up when flattened.

  Flattening. The recursive nature of dependencies is convenient for package develop-
ers, as it allows them to describe the dependencies among the different packages very
concisely, in a modular way. To study the properties of a repository, though, it is way
more convenient to use only a special flattened form D             of dependency functions that
directly describes all dependencies of each package: if
                                                                        
                          ) = π 1 , . . . , π k1 , . . . π 1 , . . . , π kn ,
                         D(π        1         1            n             n
                          j
then the packages πi are all the packages relevant for installing package π , and only
them.
   Any dependency function can be converted in this form by a sort of transitive closure
that expands the dependencies of each intermediate package, and then converts the
result again into a conjunction of disjunctions using distributivity: on our running
example, this amounts to adding a dependency from d to f , and one from d to g
(Figure 2(b)).
   This transformation has some similarity with the conversion of logical formulae to
conjunctive normal form, and is likewise subject to exponential blow-up (see, for in-
stance, Buning and Lettmann [2002]): for any n, a repository shaped like the one shown
in Figure 3 contains 3n dependencies, but its expansion contains 2n dependencies.
   This is a strong limiting result, but we are only interested in studying co-installability
of packages, so we need not fully maintain the logical equivalence of repositories. In
particular, we can prune the expanded dependency function by removing any depen-
dency containing a package with no conflicts without changing the co-installability
property. In practice, this suffices to avoid the exponential blow-up. On our running
example, this pruning phase removes the dependencies from d to e, from d to g and
from e to g, leading to the repository of Figure 2(c).
   We take a further action to render the repository more homogeneous: we add a self
dependency to each package with conflicts. This sort of reflexive closure will be very
useful when quotienting the repository, in a later phase. (There is no point in adding
self-dependencies to other packages as they would be removed by pruning.) We then
find it convenient to draw the repository using a two-level structure: on the top, we have
all packages; on the bottom, we have packages with conflicts; dependencies connects
the top layer to the bottom layer; conflicts are between packages on the bottom layer.
On our running example, this leads to the repository of Figure 2(d).
   The three phases of expansion, pruning and addition of self dependencies can be
performed in a single pass, and we thereafter use the term, flattening, to denote all of
them.
   Elimination of Irrelevant Dependencies and Conflicts. As a second phase, we iden-
tify several classes of dependencies and conflicts that are irrelevant as far as co-
installability is concerned, and remove them. In Figure 4, we can see some interesting

       ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:7




                               Fig. 4. Some irrelevant disjunctive dependencies.




                                           Fig. 5. A redundant conflict.

examples (more are given in Section 8), in all of which the disjunctive dependency
connecting package a to packages b and c can be dropped:
(a) if some branches of a disjunction are forced by a stronger dependency, all other
    branches can be dropped;
(b) a package with no conflict can be added to any installation, so dependencies on such
    a package are always satisfiable and all disjunctive dependencies containing it can
    be simplified out (this is precisely the pruning defined above during flattening,
    which may need to be performed again on the flattened repository when a conflict
    is removed);
(c) if a package has a disjunctive dependency containing a package (here, b) that
    conflicts only with other packages in this dependency (here, c), this dependency is
    always satisfiable and can be dropped: either a package conflicting with package
    b is installed, or package b can be installed; in both cases, the dependency can be
    satisfied.
In Figure 5, the conflict between packages a and b is implied by the conflict between
packages c and d and can be dropped.
  Proving the soundness of such simplifications is far from trivial: in general, one has
to rely on a peculiar structure of the repository to justify that a dependency can be
removed, but removing a dependency may modify this very structure. Therefore, a
suitable invariant has to be found, that allows us to remove most, if not all, irrelevant
dependencies.
  On our example repository, we already removed dependencies corresponding to
Figure 4(b) during flattening; the disjunctive dependency from package a to pack-
ages b and c, corresponding to Figure 4(c), can be removed, yielding the repository of
Figure 2(e).
  Quotienting Equivalent Packages. It is now quite evident looking at Figure 2(e), that
packages a, d, e, and f are, as far as co-installability is concerned, really equivalent:
they share the very same set of dependencies (notice that this fact is easily detectable on
the graph thanks to the self dependency of package f introduced during the flattening
phase).
  As many packages in a repository share the same behaviour with respect to co-
installability, it is useful to quotient the final repository, identifying these packages;
this step contributes greatly in reducing the size of the repository, as can be seen on
our running example in Figure 2(f).

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:8                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo




                                           Fig. 6. Repository sizes.




                             Fig. 7. Distribution of cone size (Debian testing).

   After removing self dependencies, one gets the final repository of Figure 2(g), where
it is now quite easy to see which package can be installed with which other package,
and which package cannot.

3. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The transformations described in this article have been proven correct, and all the
proofs have been certified in Coq [The Coq Development Team 2008]. An OCaml
program implementing these transformations has been run on several mainstream
GNU/Linux distributions: Debian testing (full suite, amd64, snapshot taken August
22, 2010), Ubuntu 10.10 (main suite, x386) and Mandriva 2010.1 (main suite, x386).
Running time were measured on a machine using a Intel Core 2 Duo Processor E6600
at 2.4 GHz. The relevant statistics of the results are given in the table of Figure 6.
  The number of packages is greatly reduced: many packages share the same be-
haviour as far as co-installability is concerned, and the quotienting phase identifies
them. In particular, many packages can always be installed, which is good news for
the GNU/Linux distributions; they are thus mapped to a single equivalence class. The
number of dependencies is reduced even more: many dependencies are not relevant to
co-installability, and are removed by our transformations. The simplification shown in
Figure 4(c) turns out to be essential; for example, in Debian, thousands of packages de-
pend on debconf which depends on either debconf-i18n or debconf-english, these two
last packages being mutually exclusive: removing the disjunctive dependency hugely
reduces the size of the final repository.
  As for conflicts, we notice that distributions contain only few of them, which explains
that flattening is practical; most of them cannot be removed.
  Finally, to each package p in a repository one can associate its cone, the set of
packages that are reachable from p by following the dependency relations; the cone
size of a package is typically quite large (Figure 7): two third of the packages have
a cone of more than a hundred packages. On the other hand, after simplification,

       ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:9




                      Fig. 8. Examples of dependency functions related by the preorder.


two-thirds of the package equivalence classes have a cone of size one, meaning that
they do not depend on any other package than themselves.
   After simplification, the Ubuntu distribution fits on a three A5 size sheets (see
Figures 16, 17, and 18 in Section 13) and can be easily inspected visually for er-
rors. The corresponding graph for the Debian distribution is much larger, but it is
our experience that it can still be displayed in a usable way with a suitable graph
viewer: the visualisation of the Debian co-installability kernel can be tested online at
http://ocsigen.org/js of ocaml/graph/.
   As a consequence of the small size of the kernel extracted from a repository, many
analyses can be performed very quickly. For example, it is easy to compute on the co-
installability kernel of a repository the pairs of packages that can never be installed
together, known as strong conflicts [Di Cosmo and Boender 2010], which is the simplest
case of co-installability. On the same data as [Di Cosmo and Boender 2010], the com-
putation takes a few seconds, instead of the several days reported there. This time is in
fact included in the running times reported in Figure 6 as we use this information when
drawing the simplified repository to emphasise packages that prevent the installation
of many other packages.

4. ORDERING REPOSITORIES
A large part of our work consists of finding constraints that can be removed while
leaving co-installability invariant. We make the idea of removing constraints precise
by defining a preorder on repositories.
  We first define a preorder on dependency functions: D D iff for every package π ,
for every dependency d ∈ D(π ), there exists a dependency d ∈ D (π ) such that d ⊆ d.
As an example, the dependency function D of the repository shown in Figure 8(a) is
strictly subsumed by the dependency function D of the repository shown in Figure 8(b).
  To see that this is really a preorder, consider the dependency function D of the reposi-
tory shown in Figure 8(c): it is subsumed by the dependency function D of the repository
shown in Figure 8(d), but it also subsumes it, and yet the two functions are different.
  This preorder corresponds exactly to the converse of logical implication: D        D if
and only if the formulas D (π ) =⇒ D(π ) can be derived for all packages π ∈ P. The
preorder is coarser than point-wise inclusion:

   Remark 4.1. If, for all π ∈ P, D(π ) ⊆ D (π ), then D                      D.

  The preorder induces an equivalence relation over dependency functions: D is equiva-
lent to D if and only if D D and D     D. A canonical representative of an equivalence
class can be defined by taking the element which is point-wise the smallest. Given a

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:10                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

dependency function D, its canonical representative can be explicitly defined as:
                        D (π ) = {d ∈ D(π ) | ∀d ∈ D(π ), d ⊆ d =⇒ d = d}.
In this example, the dependency function D of Figure 8(d) is the canonical represen-
tative of the dependency function D of the repository shown in Figure 8(c).
  This provides a first way to simplify the dependency function (illustrated by
Figure 4(a)), and our implementation aggressively puts all dependencies in canonical
form.
  We can now define a preorder on repositories: (P, D, C) (P , D , C ) if and only if:
                                  P=P,               D     D,           C⊆C.
We write ∼ for the equivalence relation associated to the relation . Given two reposi-
tories related under this preorder, going from the one on the right-hand side to the one
on the left-hand side consists in possibly removing conflicts or relaxing dependencies,
thus making it easier to install packages.
   THEOREM 4.2. When (P, D, C)          (P , D , C ), any healthy installation I of repository
(P , D , C ) is also a healthy installation of repository (P, D, C).
  PROOF. We suppose that I is a healthy installation of (P , D , C ) and prove that I is a
healthy installation of (P, D, C).
  We first prove abundance. Let π ∈ I and d ∈ D(π ). As D D , there exists d ∈ D (π )
such that d ⊆ d. As I is a healthy installation of (P , D , C ), by abundance, d ∩ I = ∅.
Hence, d ∩ I = ∅ as wanted.
  We now prove peace. As I is a healthy installation of (P , D , C ), we have C ∩ (I×I) = ∅.
On the other hand, C ⊆ C . Hence, C ∩ (I × I) = ∅ as wanted.
5. FLATTENING DEPENDENCIES
The flattened form of a dependency function, whose intuition has been given in the
introduction, is formally defined as follows; given a repository (P, D, C), the flattened
dependency function D  is the smallest function (with respect to point-wise inclusion)
such that:
                                                    TRANS
                    REFL                                  {π1 , . . . , πn} ∈ D(π )
                    (π, π ) ∈ C                           1)
                                                    d1 ∈ D(π            ...          n)
                                                                               dn ∈ D(π
                                                              
                            )
                    {π } ∈ D(π                                               )
                                                                      di ∈ D(π
                                                                1≤i≤n

As these rules are monotonic, such a function D     exists.
   The rule TRANS expands the intermediate dependencies of a package π and converts
the result back into a conjunction of disjunctions; this rule silently drops circular
dependencies: adding a dependency {π } ∈ D(π ) has no effect on D(π   ).
   The rule REFL is designed to capture precisely the two properties we have outlined
informally in the introduction: on one hand, we want to keep in D(π  ) only dependencies
on packages with at least a conflict (we prove in the next section that they are enough
for keeping co-installability invariant); on the other hand, we want D(π   ) to contain
explicitly all the packages that have a conflict and are needed to install package π (so,
if π has a conflict, it will also be an explicit dependency of itself ).
   The application of the transformation on the repository of Figure 1 gives the result
shown in Table I, which is illustrated by Figure 2(e).
   Packages d, e, and f now have the same dependencies, which reflects the intuition
that they behave the same way as far as co-installability is concerned.

        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:11

                                                         Table I.
                                                 D                  
                                                                    D
                                         a       {{b, c}, { f }}    {{b, c}, { f }}
                                         b       ∅                  {{b}}
                                         c       ∅                  {{c}}
                                         d       {{e}}              {{ f }}
                                         e       {{ f }, {g}}       {{ f }}
                                         f       ∅                  {{ f }}
                                         g       ∅                  ∅

6. STRONGLY FLAT REPOSITORIES
After being flattened as described in the previous section, a repository satisfies two
properties (Theorem 6.1): a reflexivity property (if a package has a conflict, then
it depends on itself), and a transitivity property (dependencies are stable under
composition).
   In this section, we define precisely these two properties and study repositories that
satisfies them, that we call strongly flat.
   For strongly flat repositories, co-installability can be shown equivalent to a more
convenient property, that we call weak co-installability (Theorem 6.6). Using this fact,
we prove the key result of this section: a set of packages are co-installable in a repos-
itory if and only if they are co-installable in the corresponding flattened repository
(Theorem 6.8).
   We define the composition D; D of two dependency functions over a set of packages
P as the smallest function (with respect to point-wise inclusion) such that for every
package π ∈ P, for every set {π1 , . . . , πn} ∈ D(π ), for every sets di ∈ D (πi ), we have
  1≤i≤n di ∈ (D; D )(π ).
   To any conflict relation C, we associate a dependency function C defined as follows:
                                          {{π }} if (π, π ) ∈ C for some π ∈ P
                           C (π ) =
                                          ∅      otherwise.
A repository (P, D, C) is strongly flat when the following conditions hold:
—reflexivity: C D (every package with conflict depends on itself);
—transitivity: D; D D (dependencies are closed under composition).
The flattening transformation produces strongly flat repositories.
  THEOREM 6.1. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. Let D   be the corresponding flattened
                                         C) is strongly flat.
dependency function. The repository (P, D,

   PROOF. Reflexivity, that is C D,    is a direct consequence of rule REFL.
  We now show transitivity, that is D; D  D.  Let π ∈ P and d ∈ (D;      D)(π
                                                                                ). By definition
                                                          
of composition, there exists d = {π1 , . . . , πn} ∈ D(π ) and sets di ∈ D(π      i ) such that
                                                               
d = 1≤i≤n di . We need to show that there exists d ∈ D(π ) such that d ⊆ d = 1≤i≤n di .
The proof is by induction on a derivation of d ∈ D(π    ). We have two cases.
—Case REFL. There exists π ∈ P such that (π, π ) ∈ C, and d = {π }. We have, d = d1 ∈
   1 ) = D(π
  D(π      ), hence, we can take d = d.
—Case TRANS. There exists a set {π1 , . . . , πm} ∈ D(π   ) and sets d ∈ D(π     ) such that
                                                                             j       j
  d = 1≤ j≤m dj . Besides, by induction hypothesis, for all j, if one can find packages π kj
                                                        p                 k), then there exists
  and dependencies dkj such that dj = {π 1j , . . . , π j j }, and dkj ∈ D(π j
        ) such that d ⊆
  dj ∈ D(π                     1≤k≤ p j dj . We have dj ⊆ d . Hence, we can choose for each
                                         k
           j             j


ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:12                                                                                  J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

  indices j and k an index i such that π kj = πi . Then, we take dkj = di . We therefore
                           ) such that d ⊆
  have dependencies dj ∈ D(π                         1≤k≤ p j dj . We take d =
                                                               k
                              j              j                                  1≤ j≤m dj .
                      
  By rule TRANS, d ∈ D(π ). Besides, d ⊆                        d . But, as d =
                                                                  k
                                                                                       di ,
                                                             1≤ j≤m     1≤k≤ p j   j                      1≤ j≤m
  the packages π kj ranges over all the distinct packages πi . Hence, the dependencies dkj
  ranges over all dependencies di , and we have d ⊆ 1≤i≤n di as wanted.
  Intuitively, strongly flat repositories have a two level structure. Looking for instance
at Figure 2(e), we find all packages on the top layer, and typically only packages with
conflicts at the bottom layer: thanks to transitivity, everything a package π may need
to be installed is fully described by D(π ), without recursive traversal of dependencies;
and thanks to reflexivity, conflicts need only be considered on the image of D.
  We can take advantage of this to define a more convenient way of capturing
co-installability by defining it specifically on the two level structure of strongly flat
repositories: while in our application we will have packages on the top and the bottom
layer, the definition and the following mathematical development make perfect sense
even if the objects on the two levels are different. To make this fact explicit, that we refer
to the objects at the lower level, that only carry conflicts, as features in the following.
  A configuration is a pair (I, F) of a set I of packages and a set F of features; we say
that it is healthy when the following conditions hold.
—Abundance. Every package has what it needs. Formally, for every package π ∈ I, and
 for every dependency d ∈ D(π ), we have d ∩ F = ∅.
—Peace. No two features conflict, that is, C ∩ (F × F) = ∅.
This is subtly different from the homonymous definitions regarding installations. Con-
flicts are only checked in F, and abundance only checked for packages in I with respect
to F; the sets F and I might as well be disjoint, here.
  Remark 6.2. The two following properties hold:
—an installation I is healthy iff the configuration (I, I) is healthy;
—if (, F) is healthy and  ⊆ , then ( , F) is healthy.
  A set of packages  are weakly co-installable if there exists a set of features F ⊆ P
such that the configuration (, F) is healthy. In general, this is a weaker notion.
   LEMMA 6.3. If a set of packages  are co-installable, then they are also weakly
co-installable.
   PROOF. Suppose the set of packages  are co-installable. By definition, there exists
a healthy installation F such that  ⊆ F. We terminate the proof by using in turn both
properties in Remark 6.2. The configuration (F, F) is healthy. Hence, by anti-monotony
of the definition of healthiness, (, F) is healthy.
  In strongly flat repositories, though, the two notions are equivalent.
  We present here two technical lemmas needed in the proof of Theorem 6.8.
  LEMMA 6.4. Let (P, D, C) be a repository such that C         D. Let (I, F) be a healthy
configuration. For every package π ∈ I, if (π, π ) ∈ C for some π ∈ P, then π ∈ F.
  PROOF. We consider a package π ∈ I such that (π, π ) ∈ C for some package π ∈ P.
As C D, there exists d ∈ D(π ) such that d ⊆ C (π ) = {π }. By abundance, d ∩ F = ∅.
Hence, π ∈ F.
   LEMMA 6.5. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. Let D be a dependency function such that
C    D and D; D       D . If a set of packages  are weakly co-installable in (P, D , C),
then they are co-installable in (P, D, C).

        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:13

   PROOF. We consider a set of packages  which are weakly co-installable in (P, D , C).
This means that there exists a set of packages F such that the configuration (, F) is
healthy in (P, D , C). We then consider a maximal set of packages I such that  ⊆ I
and the configuration (I, F) is healthy in (P, D , C). We can conclude if we prove that I
is healthy in (P, D, C).
   We first prove abundance. We take π ∈ I and d = {π1 , . . . , πn} ∈ D(π ) and need to
prove that d ∩ I = ∅. We want to show that we can find π ∈ d such that (I ∪ {π }, F),
is healthy. Indeed, then, by maximality of I, we have π ∈ I. Hence, d ∩ I = ∅ as
wanted. The package π should be such that, for all d ∈ D(π ), we have d ∩ F = ∅.
The proof is by contradiction. Suppose that for all i, there exists di ∈ D (πi ) such that
di ∩ F = ∅. As D; D      D , there exists d ∈ D (π ) such that d ⊆ 1≤i≤n di . We have
d ∩ F ⊆ 1≤i≤n di = ∅. This contradicts the fact that π ∈ I and (I, F) is healthy. Hence,
the existence of a suitable package π which allow us to finish the proof of abundance.
   We now prove peace by contradiction. Suppose that C ∩ (I × I) = ∅, that is, there
exists π ∈ I and π ∈ I such that (π, π ) ∈ C. As (I, F) is healthy, we have π ∈ F and
π ∈ F by Lemma 6.4, and then (π, π ) ∈ C by peace. We reach a contradiction, hence,
C ∩ (I × I) = ∅.
  THEOREM 6.6. Any set of packages  weakly co-installable in a strongly flat repository
are also co-installable.
   PROOF. This is an immediate consequence of Lemma 6.5, taking D = D .
   It is interesting to remark that the result of the flattening operation can be mathe-
matically characterised as follows.
   LEMMA 6.7. The flattened dependency function D     associated to a repository (P, D, C)
is the least dependency function D (for preorder , and up to equivalence) such that:
—C D
—D; D       D.
   PROOF. Clearly, the flattened dependency function satisfies these equations. Let D
be another dependency function satisfying the equations. We want to prove that, for all
         ) D (π ). By unfolding the definition of the preorder, this can be rephrased
π ∈ P, D(π
                                ), there exists d ∈ D (π ) such that d ⊆ d. The proof is
as: for all π ∈ P, for all d ∈ D(π
                                      ). We have two cases.
by induction on a derivation of d ∈ D(π
—Case REFL. There exists π ∈ P such that (π, π ) ∈ C, and d = {π }. From the first
  assumption, there exists d ∈ D (π ), such that d ⊆ {π }. Hence, d ⊆ d as wanted.
                                                                          i ) such that
—Case TRANS. There exists a set {π1 , . . . , πn} ∈ D(π ) and sets di ∈ D(π
  d = 1≤i≤n di . Besides, by induction hypothesis, for all i, there exists di ∈ D (πi )
  such that di ⊆ di . From the second assumption, there exists d ∈ D (π ), such that
  d ⊆ 1≤i≤n di . We have, d ⊆ 1≤i≤n di ⊆ 1≤i≤n di = d as wanted.
   The essential result of this section is that co-installability is left invariant by
flattening.
   THEOREM 6.8. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. Let D be the corresponding flattened de-
pendency function. Let  be a set of packages. The following propositions are equivalent:
(1)  is co-installable in (P, D, C);
                                       C);
(2)  is weakly co-installable in (P, D,
                               
(3)  is co-installable in (P, D, C).
  PROOF. (3) implies (2) by Lemma 6.3. (2) implies (3) by Lemmas 6.6 and 6.1. (2)
implies (1) by Lemmas 6.5 and 6.7. We now assume (1) and prove (3).

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:14                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo




                                Fig. 9. Illustration of monotony requirement.

  By definition, there exists a healthy installation I of repository (P, D, C) such that
 ⊆ I. We can just show that I is also a healthy installation of repository (P, D,        C).
                                                                            
Peace is immediate. We prove abundance. We consider π ∈ P and d ∈ D(π ). We need to
show that if π ∈ I, then d ∩ I = ∅. The proof is by induction on a derivation of d ∈ D(π ).
We have two cases.
—Case REFL. We have d = {π }. Hence, if π ∈ I, then d ∩ I = {π } = ∅.
—Case TRANS. We have {π1 , . . . , πn} ∈ D(π ) and d = 1≤i≤n di where di ∈ D(π    i ) and, if
  πi ∈ I, then di ∩ I = ∅ (induction hypothesis). Let us assume π ∈ I. By abundance, as
  {π1 , . . . , πn} ∈ D(π ), there must exists some i such that πi ∈ I. Then, di ∩ I = ∅, and
  thus d ∩ I = ∅.
7. FLAT REPOSITORIES
In this section, we focus on a particular class ∇C ⊆ P(P) of dependencies that can
be safely removed (Theorem 7.11). Removing these dependencies may destroy the
strongly flat structure of a repository, but we introduce the weaker notion of flat
repository which is preserved (Theorem 7.11), and for which co-installability and weak
co-installability still coincide (Theorem 7.8), thus enabling further simplifications
introduced in Section 8.
  We want to capture in the class ∇C a set of dependencies that have the following two
key properties.
—Always Satisfiable. Any healthy configuration in the repository can be extended to
  satisfy these dependencies, so they are irrelevant for co-installability and we can
  remove them; formally, this means that if d ∈ ∇C , then for all F ∈ P(P) maximal with
  respect to set inclusion such that C ∩ (F × F) = ∅, we have d ∩ F = ∅;
—Monotony. A dependency which is in ∇C must still be always satisfiable even if we
  remove some conflicts from the repository; formally, if C ⊆ C, then ∇C ⊆ ∇C .
The monotony property is necessary, because in the next section we introduce further
simplifications that remove redundant conflicts. We want to be sure that removing a
conflict later on does not invalidate the decision taken here of removing a dependency,
as illustrated in Figure 9: the disjunctive dependency on packages b and c can always
be satisfied because the conflict between d and e prevents the simultaneous installation
of d and e; but this dependency is not in ∇C since it is no longer satisfiable if the conflict
between d and e is removed. This leads to the following.
   Definition 7.1. Given a repository (P, D, C), the set ∇C is the largest set such that
d ∈ ∇C if and only if, for all C ⊆ C, for all F ∈ P(P) maximal with respect to set
inclusion such that C ∩ (F × F) = ∅, we have d ∩ F = ∅.
   We can give a more explicit characterisation of the elements of ∇C : these are exactly
the dependencies that contain at least a package having only internal conflicts, like in
Figure 4(c). This is quite a remarkable fact, as the property introduced in Definition 7.1
is a global property of the repository, and yet it turns out to be possible to characterise
it purely locally, as a condition on individual dependencies.
  THEOREM 7.2. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. The set ∇C is the set of dependencies d
such that there exists a package π ∈ d such that, for all pairs (π, π ) ∈ C, we have π ∈ d.


        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:15




                                  Fig. 10. Transitivity of dependencies is lost.



   PROOF. We first assume that there exists no package π ∈ d such that, for all pairs
(π, π ) ∈ C, we have π ∈ d. We show that then d ∈ ∇C . Let C be the set of conflicts in
C that cross d:
                                  C = {(π, π ) ∈ C | #({π, π } ∩ d) = 1}.
Clearly, this is a conflict relation (it is symmetric and irreflexive). We consider the set
of features F = P\d. We have C ∩ (F × F) = ∅. If we can now prove that the set F is a
maximal set satisfying this property, we can conclude. Indeed, then, as d ∩ F = ∅, the
set d is not in ∇C . We consider a strictly larger set of features F and show that it does
not satisfies the property. The set F must contain at least a package π in dependency d.
But then, by assumption, there exists π ∈ P\d = F such that (π, π ) ∈ C. By definition
of C , we have (π, π ) ∈ C . Hence, C ∩ (F × F ) = ∅, as wanted.
   We now assume that there exists a package π ∈ d such that, for all pairs (π, π ) ∈ C,
we have π ∈ d. We show that then d ∈ ∇C . Let C be a conflict relation such that
C ⊆ C. Let F be a maximal set of features such that C ∩ (F × F) = ∅. We need to show
that d ∩ F = ∅. If we assume that there exists no π ∈ F such that (π, π ) ∈ C , then,
by maximality of F, we must have π ∈ F. Hence, d ∩ F = ∅ as wanted. Otherwise,
there exists π ∈ F such that (π, π ) ∈ C . But then, π ∈ d. Hence, d ∩ F = ∅ as
well.
  Notice that, if a dependency d contains a package π with no conflict, then it is in ∇C ;
so ∇C also contains the redundant dependencies shown in Figure 4(b).
   Remark 7.3. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. The set ∇C is upward-closed: if d ⊆ d and
d ∈ ∇C , then d ∈ ∇C .
   PROOF. This is immediate thanks to Theorem 7.2.
  As we shall see, weak co-installability is preserved by the transformation that re-
moves the elements of set ∇C from a dependency function D of a strongly flat repository.
But, in general, the strongly flat property is lost: when we remove one dependency from
a strongly flat repository, it may be the case that the transitivity of the flattened de-
pendency function does no longer hold. Consider, for example, the repository shown
in Figure 10: the dependency {a, b} for package e is in ∇C , but it can also be obtained
by composing the depency {c, b} with the dependency {a} ∈ Dc and {b} ∈ Db. So, if we
remove {a, b}, we break transitivity.
  So we need a weaker notion of repository that is preserved by this simplification. We
start by defining a coarser preorder on dependency functions that ignores dependencies
in ∇C :
       D ≺C D if and only if for every package π in the domain of D, for every
       dependency d ∈ D(π ), either d ∈ ∇C or there exists a dependency d ∈ D (π )
       such that d ⊆ d.
  This preorder can be extended to repositories by setting (P, D, C) ≺ (P , D , C ) iff
P = P , D ≺C D , and C ⊆ C . We write ≈ for the associated equivalence relation.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:16                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

  Remark 7.4. The following implications hold:
—if C ⊆ C and D ≺C D , then D ≺C D ;
—if D D , then D ≺C D ;
—if (P, D, C) (P , D , C ), then (P, D, C) ≺ (P , D , C ).
  A repository (P, D, C) is flat when it satisfies the following properties:
—reflexivity: C ≺C D;
—transitivity: D; D ≺C D.
Flat repositories have a series of good properties: they include strongly flat repositories,
co-installability and weak co-installability still coincide, removing ∇C preserves flatness
and keeps co-installability invariant.
  LEMMA 7.5. Any strongly flat repository is flat.
  PROOF. This is a direct consequence of Remark 7.4.
  Remark 7.6. Let (P, D, C) be a flat repository. Let π ∈ P such that (π, π ) ∈ C for
some π ∈ P. Then, there exists d ∈ D(π ) such that d ⊆ {π }.
   PROOF. Let π ∈ P such that (π, π ) ∈ C for some π ∈ P. By reflexivity (C ≺C D),
we have either {π } ∈ ∇C or there exists d ∈ D(π ) such that d ⊆ {π }. By Theorem 7.2,
{π } ∈ ∇C . Hence, the result.
   LEMMA 7.7. If (P, D, C) ≺ (P , D , C ), (P , D , C )                      (P, D, C), and the repository
(P, D, C) is flat, then the repository (P , D , C ) is flat.
   PROOF. We assume that (P, D, C) ≺ (P , D , C ), (P , D , C ) (P, D, C), and (P, D, C)
is flat. We show that (P , D , C ) is flat.
   We first show reflexivity, that is, C ≺C D . We have C ≺C D ≺C D by hypothesis.
Hence, C ≺C D ≺C D by Remark 7.4. On the other hand, we have C ⊆ C. Hence,
for all π ∈ P, we have C (π ) ⊆ C (π ). Thus, C         C by Remark 4.1, and finally
C ≺C C by Remark 7.4. We conclude by transitivity of ≺C .
   We now show transitivity, that is, D ; D ≺C D . Let π 0 ∈ P and d0 ∈ (D ; D )(π 0 ). We
show that either d0 ∈ ∇C or there exists a dependency d ∈ D (π 0 ) such that d ⊆ d0 .
By definition of composition, there exists a dependency d = {π1 , . . . , πn} ∈ D (π 0 ) and
dependencies di ∈ D (πi ) such that d0 = 1≤i≤n di . As D         D, there exists d ∈ D(π 0 )
such that d ⊆ d . Similarly, for all i, there exists di ∈ D(πi ) such that di ⊆ di . By
transitivity in (P, D, C), either 1≤i≤n di ∈ ∇C or there exists d1 ∈ D(π 0 ) such that
d1 ⊆ 1≤i≤n di . In the first case, we have 1≤i≤n di ⊆ 1≤i≤n di = d0 . Then, as ∇C is
upward-closed (Remark 7.3) and C ⊆ C, we have d0 ∈ ∇C ⊆ ∇C as wanted. In the
second case, we have d1 ⊆ 1≤i≤n di ⊆ 1≤i≤n di = d0 . As D ≺C D , either d1 ∈ ∇C or
there exists d2 ∈ D (π 0 ) such that d2 ⊆ d1 . If d1 ∈ ∇C , then d0 ∈ ∇C as well, as ∇C is
upward-closed. This is what we wanted to prove. Otherwise, we have d2 ∈ D (π 0 ) such
that d2 ⊆ d1 ⊆ d0 , which is again what is needed to conclude.
   THEOREM 7.8. Any set of packages  weakly co-installable in a flat repository are
co-installable in this repository.
    PROOF. The proof follows the proof of Theorem 6.6, with minor modifications.
   Let (P, D, C) be a flat repository. Let  be a set of packages weakly co-installable in
(P, D, C). There exists a set of packages F such that the configuration (, F) is healthy
in (P, D, C). We assume that F is a maximal set of packages satisfying this property.
We then consider a maximal set of packages I such that  ⊆ I and the configuration
(I, F) is healthy in (P, D, C). We can conclude if we prove that I is healthy in (P, D, C).

        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:17

   We first prove abundance. We take π ∈ I and d = {π1 , . . . , πn} ∈ D(π ) and need to
prove that d ∩ I = ∅. We want to show that we can find π ∈ d such that (I ∪ {π }, F), is
healthy. Indeed, then, by maximality of I, we have π ∈ I. Hence, d ∩ I = ∅ as wanted.
The package π should be such that, for all d ∈ D(π ), we have d ∩ F = ∅. The proof
is by contradiction. Suppose that for all i, there exists di ∈ D(πi ) such that di ∩ F = ∅.
As D; D ≺C D, either 1≤i≤n di ∈ ∇C or there exists d ∈ D(π ) such that d ⊆ 1≤i≤n di .
In the first case, by maximality of F and definition of ∇C , ( 1≤i≤n di ) ∩ F = ∅. This
contradicts the assumption that di ∩ F = ∅ for all i. In the second case, we have
d ∩ F ⊆ 1≤i≤n di = ∅. This contradicts the fact that π ∈ I and (I, F) is healthy. Hence,
the existence of a suitable package π which allow us to finish the proof of abundance.
   We now prove peace by contradiction. Suppose that C ∩ (I × I) = ∅, that is, there
exists π ∈ I and π ∈ I such that (π, π ) ∈ C. As (I, F) is healthy, we have π ∈ F and
π ∈ F by Lemma 6.4, and then (π, π ) ∈ C by peace. We reach a contradiction, hence
C ∩ (I × I) = ∅.

   LEMMA 7.9. If (P, D, C) ≺ (P , D , C ), then any set of packages  weakly co-installable
in repository (P , D , C ) is weakly co-installable in repository (P, D, C).

   PROOF. We assume that (P, D, C) ≺ (P , D , C ) and that the set of packages  is
weakly co-installable in (P , D , C ). There exists a set of packages F such that (, F) is
a healthy configuration in (P , D , C ). In particular, we have C ∩ (F × F) = ∅. As C ⊆ C ,
we also have C ∩ (F × F) = ∅. There exists thus a set of packages F maximal such
that C ∩ (F × F ) = ∅ and F ⊆ F . We can conclude by showing that (, F ) is a healthy
configuration in (P, D, C). We have peace by definition of F . We show abundance. Let
π ∈  and d ∈ D(π ). We need to show that d ∩ F = ∅. As D ≺C D , either d ∈ ∇C
or there exists d ∈ D (π ) such that d ⊆ d. In the first case, by definition of ∇C and
maximality of F , we have d ∩ F = ∅ as wanted. In the second case, as (, F) is a
healthy configuration, we have d ∩ F = ∅, and therefore d ∩ F = ∅ as wanted.

  LEMMA 7.10. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. We define a simplified dependency function
D by: D (π ) = D(π )\∇C for all π ∈ P. Then:

—(P, D , C) (P, D, C);
—(P, D , C) ≈ (P, D, C).

  PROOF. For all π ∈ P, we have D (π ) ⊆ D(π ). Hence, by Remark 4.1, D          D, and
therefore, (P, D , C) (P, D, C). Then, by Remark 7.4, (P, D , C) ≺ (P, D, C).
  We now prove (P, D, C) ≺ (P, D , C). It is sufficient to show that D ≺C D . Let π ∈ P
and d ∈ D(π ). We need to prove that either d ∈ ∇C or there exists d ∈ D (π ) = D(π )\∇C
such that d ⊆ d. This is clearly satisfied, taking d = d in the second case.

   THEOREM 7.11. Let (P, D, C) be a flat repository and D be the dependency function
such that D (π ) = D(π )\∇C for all π ∈ P. The repository (P, D , C) is flat, and co-
installability is left invariant by this transformation.

  PROOF. Flatness is a consequence of Lemmas 7.7 and 7.10. Invariance is a conse-
quence of Theorem 7.8, and Lemmas 7.9 and 7.10.

   One can still reason on flat repositories, as far as co-installability is concerned, as if
their dependency function was transitive: just choose configurations (I, F) where F is
maximal, and then any dependency obtained by composition is satisfied, even when it
is not explicitly in the dependency function. (For strongly flat repositories, this holds
for arbitrary sets F.)

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:18                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

  The following technical lemma is a crucial tool for reasoning on flat repositories. It
states that a stronger form of transitivity where dependencies are not fully composed
holds for flat repositories.
   LEMMA 7.12. Let (P, D, C) be a flat repository, π ∈ P, d ∈ D(π ). Let  = {π1 , . . . , πn}
be a subset of d. We assume that, for all i, there exists di ∈ D(πi ). Then, there exists
d ∈ D(π ) ∪ ∇C such that d ⊆ (d\) ∪ 1≤i≤n di .
   PROOF. Suppose that there exists π ∈ d\ such that {π } ∈ ∇C (that is, by
Theorem 7.2, package π conflicts with no package). Then we can take d = {π } and
conclude. Thus, we can assume that, for all π ∈ d\, there exists π ∈ P such that
(π , π ) ∈ C.
  We show that for all π ∈ d we can find d ∈ D(π ) such that d ⊆ (d\) ∪ 1≤i≤n di . We
can then use transitivity (D; D ≺C D) to conclude. Indeed, by transitivity, there exists
d ∈ D; D such that d ⊆ (d\) ∪ 1≤i≤n di and either d ∈ ∇C or there exists d ∈ D(π )
such that d ⊆ d . We can then conclude by taking either d or d .
  Let π ∈ d. If π = πi for some i, we can take d = di . Otherwise, π ∈ d\. We
have assumed that there exists π such that (π , π ) ∈ C. By Remark 7.6, there exists
d ∈ D(π ) such that d ⊆ {π }. This dependency is suitable as π ∈ d\.
  LEMMA 7.13. Let (P, D, C) be a flat repository. Let C be a conflict relation such that
C ⊆ C. The repository (P, D, C ) is flat.
   PROOF. We first prove reflexivity: C ≺C D. By assumption, C ≺C D. Hence, by
transitivity, it is sufficient to prove that C ≺C C . Clearly, as C ⊆ C, we have
C (π ) ⊆ C (π ) for all π . We conclude by Remark 4.1 and 7.4.
  We now prove transitivity. By assumption, we have D;D ≺C D. Hence, by Remark 7.4,
as C ⊆ C, we have D; D ≺C D as wanted.
8. IRRELEVANT CONSTRAINTS
We review now several classes of dependencies and conflicts that are redundant and
can be simplified out.
  In the following, we will write D\{π → d} for the dependency function D where the
dependency d of package π has been removed. Formally,

                          (D\{π0 → d0 }) (π0 ) = D(π0 )\{d0 }
                          (D\{π0 → d0 }) (π ) = D(π )         when π = π0 .
8.1. Clearly Irrelevant Dependencies
The results of the previous section let us remove the dependencies in ∇C from a flat
repository while leaving weak co-installability invariant and keeping the repository
flat.
8.2. Conflict Covered Dependencies
An example of another very interesting class of irrelevant dependencies is shown in
Figure 11, where the dependency for package a can always be satisfied despite the
conflict between packages e and f (we assume the other packages in this dependency
also have conflicts, even if not shown in the picture, so the dependency cannot be
obviously removed): indeed, for this conflict to be relevant for the dependency, f needs
to be installed; but if f is installed, at least one of packages c and d is installed as well,
and thus the dependency is satisfied without needing to install e. This generalizes to
the case where package e is in conflict with several packages with the same property
as package f .

        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:19




                          Fig. 11. Dependency covered by the conflict requirements.

  More formally, we say that a dependency d is conflict covered at π if it contains a
package π such that for all (π, π ) ∈ C, there exists a dependency d ∈ D(π ) such that
d ⊆ d\{π }. Removing one such dependency leaves co-installability invariant.
  LEMMA 8.1. Let (P, D, C) be a flat repository, d be a conflict covered dependency, and
D be the dependency function obtained by removing d from D. Any set of packages
weakly co-installable in (P, D , C) is weakly co-installable in (P, D, C).
    PROOF. Let d0 ∈ D(π0 ) be one of these dependencies. There exists π1 ∈ d0 such that
for all (π1 , π ) ∈ C, there exists a dependency d ∈ D(π ) such that d ⊆ d0 \{π1 }. Let
D = D\{π0 → d0 } be the dependency function with this dependency removed. Let 
be a weakly co-installable set of packages in the repository (P, D , C). There exists a
set of features F such that (, F) is a healthy configuration of (P, D , C). We consider
a maximal such a set F (with respect to inclusion). Clearly, the set F is then maximal
such that C ∩ (F × F) = ∅. If d0 ∩ F = ∅, then (, F) is a healthy configuration
of (P, D, C) as well, as wanted. We now consider the case where d0 ∩ F = ∅. Let
F = (F\{π | (π1 , π ) ∈ C}) ∪ {π1 }. We show that (, F ) is a healthy configuration of
(P, D, C). Peace is clear. We need to show abundance.
   Let π ∈ I and d ∈ D(π ). We want to show that d ∩ F = ∅. If π1 ∈ d, this is the case.
We can thus assume that π1 ∈ d. In particular, this means that d = d0 , and therefore,
by abundance, d ∩ F = ∅. The remainder of the proof is by contradiction. We assume
that d ∩ F = ∅. We consider the packages π i such that d ∩ F = {π 1 , . . . , π n}. We have
π i ∈ F\F . Thus, for all i, we have (π1 , π i ) ∈ C, and therefore, by assumption, there
exists di ∈ D(π i ) such that di ⊆ d0 \{π1 }. By Lemma 7.12, there exists a dependency d
such that d ∈ D(π ) ∪ ∇C and d ⊆ (d\(d ∩ F)) ∪ 1≤i≤n di . From this last inclusion, we
get d ⊆ (d\F) ∪ (d0 \{π1 }). From this, on the one hand, as π1 ∈ d, we can see that π1 ∈ d ,
and therefore d = d. Hence, d ∈ D (π ) ∪ ∇C . By abundance and maximality of F, we
get d ∩ F = ∅. On the other hand, d ∩ F ⊆ ((d\F) ∪ (d0 \{π1 })) ∩ F = (d0 \{π1 }) ∩ F =
((d0 ∩ F)\{π1 }) = ∅. We reach a contraction, which completes the proof.
  Unfortunately, removing such dependencies may destroy the flatness of the reposi-
tory, so we remove them one after another, in a greedy way, and only after checking
that flatness is preserved by using the following result.
   LEMMA 8.2. Let (P, D, C) be a flat repository. Let π ∈ P and d ∈ D. Let D be the
dependency function D where the dependency d of package π has been removed. If the
following two conditions hold, then (P, D , C) is flat.
—d ⊆ {π };
—for all d ∈ (D ; D )(π ), we have d ⊆ d .
   PROOF. We first prove reflexivity, that is, C ≺C D . Let π ∈ P and d ∈ C (π ). We
show that either d ∈ ∇C , or there exists d ∈ D (π ) such that d ⊆ d . By definition,
we must have d = {π }. By reflexivity in repository (P, D, C), we have either d ∈ ∇C , or
there exists d ∈ D(π ) such that d ⊆ d . In the first case, we can conclude immediately.
If d ∈ D (π ), we can conclude as well by taking d = d . Otherwise, we must have

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:20                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

π = π and d = d. But, then, d = d ⊆ d = {π } = {π }. This is not possible due to the
first assumption.
   We now prove transitivity, that is, D ; D ≺C D . Let π ∈ P and d ∈ (D ; D )(π ). We
show that either d ∈ ∇C , or there exists d ∈ D (π ) such that d ⊆ d . By definition,
there exists a dependency {π1 , . . . , πn} ∈ D (π ) and dependencies di ∈ D (πi ) such that
d = 1≤i≤n di . By transitivity in repository (P, D, C), either d ∈ ∇C or there exists d ∈
D(π ) such that d ⊆ d . In the first case, we can conclude immediately. If d ∈ D (π ),
we can conclude as well by taking d = d . Otherwise, we must have π = π and d = d.
But, then, d = d ⊆ d ∈ D ; D . This is not possible due to the second assumption.
In practice, it can be simpler to get all possible dependencies d by taking all depen-
dencies d ∈ D(π )\{d, {π }} and composing them with dependencies in D.
  In theory, the result of this simplification may depend on the order in which one
applies the conflict covered reductions to remove dependencies: indeed, as a graph
rewriting system [Baader and Nipkow 1998], this transformation has unsolvable crit-
ical pairs.
  In practice, though, we remove all instances present in the initial repository.

8.3. Redundant Conflicts
We consider some of the conflicts that can be removed from a repository while leaving
co-installability invariant. A conflicting pair (π1 , π1 ) ∈ C is redundant if there exists a
dependency d ∈ D(π1 ) such that for all π2 ∈ d, there exists a package π2 such that:
—(π2 , π2 ) ∈ C;
—{π1 , π1 } = {π2 , π2 };
—there exists d ∈ D(π2 ) such that d ⊆ {π2 }.
   Redundant conflicts can be removed, but only one at a time: for example, if two con-
flicts are considered redundant thanks to the existence of one another, then removing
both of them simultaneously is incorrect.
   LEMMA 8.3. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. Let (π1 , π2 ) be a redundant conflict in this
repository. Any healthy installation of repository (P, D, C\{(π1 , π2 ), (π2 , π1 )}) is healthy
in repository (P, D, C).
   PROOF. Let  be a healthy set of packages of repository (P, D, C\{(π1 , π2 ), (π2 , π1 )}).
We show that it is healthy in repository (P, D, C). Abundance is clear. We prove peace,
that is, C ∩ ( × ) = ∅. We have by hypothesis (C\{(π1 , π2 ), (π2 , π1 )})) ∩ ( × ) = ∅.
Thus, we can conclude if packages π1 and π2 are not both in . The proof is by contra-
diction: we assume the packages are in  and reach a contradiction. By abundance in
the initial repository, for any dependency d ∈ D(π1 ), there exists a package π1 ∈ d ∩ .
Then, by definition of redundant conflicts, there exists a dependency d1 ∈ D(π1 ), a
package π1 in d1 ∩ , a dependency d2 ∈ D(π2 ) and a package π2 ∈  such that
(π1 , π2 ) ∈ C\{(π1 , π2 ), (π2 , π1 )}) and d2 ⊆ {π2 }. By abundance, d2 ∩  = ∅, hence π2 ∈ .
This contradicts peace in the initial repository. Hence, the result.
  Removing redundant conflicts involves a trade off. On one side, it may allow re-
moving some additional dependencies; on the other, it can also break some interesting
structures. In Figure 12, the conflict between b and c is redundant, but removing it
breaks the clique a, b, c, which is useful when drawing a simplified graph.

8.4. Dependence on Conflicting Packages
A special configuration may surface in the repository during simplification when the
initial repository contains broken packages, as depicted in Figure 13: clearly, package

        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:21




                               Fig. 12. Redundant conflict belonging to a clique.




                                  Fig. 13. Dependence on conflicting package.

a cannot be installed, and leaving such a configuration in the repository would pollute
the graphical representation. In this case, we mark explicitly package a as broken by
replacing its dependencies by the empty dependency ∅. All conflicts involving a can then
be also removed, as they are redundant (Section 8.3). The transformation preserves
healthiness.
   LEMMA 8.4. Let π be a package not installable in some repository (P, D, C). Let D
be the dependency function that coincide with D for all packages but π and such that
D (π ) = {∅}. Any healthy installation of repository (P, D, C) is also healthy in repository
(P, D , C).
   PROOF. Let I be an healthy installation of repository (P, D, C). We show that it is an
healthy installation of repository (P, D , C). Clearly, peace is satisfied and abundance
is satisfied for all packages distinct from π . We now show abundance for package π .
As D (π ) = ∅, this reduces to showing that π ∈ I. This is indeed the case as π is not
installable in the initial repository.
  The flatness of the repository may be destroyed, as some of the removed dependencies
may be involved in transitivity. Thus, after applying such simplification, flattening
should be performed again.

9. QUOTIENTING THE SET OF PACKAGES
In real-world repositories, many packages share the same behaviour as far as co-
installability is concerned: for example, a lot of packages can always be installed, and
some groups of packages only conflicts with a single other package.
   In this section, we define an equivalence relation between packages, and show that
the quotient with respect to this relation preserves all the good properties of a repos-
itory. We define two packages as equivalent in a repository (P, D, C) if they have the
same dependencies:
                                    π ≡ π if and only if D(π ) = D(π ).
We write [π ] for the equivalence class of package π , and extend this definition to set of
packages: [] = {[π ] | π ∈ }. The quotient repository (P , D , C ) of a repository (P, D, C)
is naturally defined as follows:
—P is the set of all equivalence classes: P = P/≡ = {[π ] | π ∈ P};
—the dependency function D is such that D ([π ]) = {[d] | d ∈ D(π )} for all π ∈ P;
—the conflict relation C is defined by
                                          C = {([π ], [π ]) | (π, π ) ∈ C}.
   If the original repository does not contain dependencies between conflicting packages,
like those between a and b shown in Figure 13, nor redundant conflicts, then the

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:22                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

quotient repository is indeed a repository (the key point to check is irreflexivity of the
conflict relation).
   LEMMA 9.1. Let (P, D, C) be a flat repository such that, for all π ∈ P and for all
d ∈ D(π ), if d ⊆ {π } for some π ∈ P, then (π, π ) ∈ C. Its quotient is indeed a repository.
   PROOF. Let (P , D , C ) be the tentative quotiented repository associated to repository
(P, D, C), as defined previously. The result is clear, except for irreflexivity of C , which
we show here. We assume that (π , π ) ∈ C for some package π ∈ P and reach a
contradiction. By definition of C , there exists π1 ∈ P and π2 ∈ P such that π = [π1 ] =
[π2 ] and (π1 , π2 ) ∈ C. By Remark 7.6, there exists a dependency d ∈ D(π2 ) such that
d ⊆ {π2 }. By definition of quotienting, D(π1 ) = D(π2 ), and thus d ∈ D(π1 ). But then, by
hypothesis, we should have (π1 , π2 ) ∈ C. Hence, a contradiction, as wanted.
   Remark 9.2. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. Let (I, F) be a healthy configuration
of repository (P, D, C). We assume that the set F is a maximal set (with respect to
inclusion) satisfying this property. Then, for all packages π in P\F, there exists a
package π such that (π, π ) ∈ C.
   PROOF. We have {π } ∈ ∇C . Indeed, otherwise, we would have, by definition, {π } ∩ F =
∅, and thus π ∈ F. Then, by Theorem 7.2, there exists π such that (π, π ) ∈ C.
   LEMMA 9.3. Let (P, D, C) be a flat repository. Let (I, F) be a healthy configuration of
repository (P, D, C). We assume that the set F is a maximal set (with respect to inclusion)
satisfying this property. Let π ∈ P\F. Let π ∈ P such that D(π ) = D(π ) (in other words,
π ∈ [π ]). Then, there exists d ∈ D(π ) such that d ⊆ {π }.
   PROOF. By Remark 9.2, there exists π such that (π, π ) ∈ C. By Remark 7.6, there
exists d ∈ D(π ) such that d ⊆ {π }. We have D(π ) = D(π ), hence the result.
   LEMMA 9.4. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. Let (P , D , C ) be the corresponding quotient
repository. Let (I, F) be a healthy configuration of repository (P, D, C). We assume that the
set F is a maximal set (with respect to inclusion) satisfying this property. Then, ([I], [F])
is a healthy configuration of repository (P , D , C ). (We write F for the complement P\F
of set F.)

   PROOF. Let F = [F] = {[π ] ∈ P | ∀π ∈ [π ], π ∈ F}.
  We first prove abundance. Let π0 ∈ [I] and d0 ∈ D (π0 ). There exists π0 ∈ I and
d0 ∈ D(π0 ) such that π0 = [π0 ] and d0 = [d0 ]. By abundance in repository (P, D, C), we
have d0 ∩ F = ∅. Suppose there exists π ∈ d0 ∩ F such that [π ] ∈ F . Then, as [π ] ∈ d0 ,
we have d0 ∩ F = ∅ as wanted. Otherwise, for all package π ∈ d0 ∩ F, there exists a
package π ∈ [π ]\F. By Lemma 9.3, there also exists a dependency d ∈ D(π ) such that
d ⊆ {π }, and therefore d ∩ F = ∅. We can apply Lemma 7.12 to compose d0 with all
these dependencies. Hence, there exists d ∈ D(π0 ) ∪ ∇C such that d ∩ F = ∅. But by
abundance and maximality of F, we should have d ∩ F = ∅. We reach a contradiction.
Hence, this second case is actually not possible.
  We now show peace. The proof is by contradiction. Suppose that peace does not hold.
Then, there exists π1 ∈ F and π2 ∈ F such that (π1 , π2 ) ∈ C . By definition of C ,
there exists a pair (π1 , π2 ) ∈ C such that π1 = [π1 ] and π2 = [π2 ]. By definition of F ,
π1 ∈ F and π2 ∈ F. Then, by peace in repository (π, D, C), (π1 , π2 ) ∈ C. We reach a
contradiction, hence the result.
   LEMMA 9.5. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. Let (P , D , C ) be the corresponding quotient
repository. Let (I, F) be a healthy configuration of repository (P , D , C ). We pose I =

        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:23

{π | [π ] ∈ I} and F = {π | [π ] ∈ F}. Then, (I , F ) is a healthy configuration of repository
(P, D, C).
  PROOF. We first prove abundance. Let π ∈ I and d ∈ D(π ). We need to show that
d ∩ F = ∅. We have [π ] ∈ I. By definition of D , we have [d] ∈ D ([π ]). By abundance,
we thus have [d] ∩ F = ∅, that is, there exists a package π ∈ d such that [π ] ∈ F. We
thus have π ∈ F , hence, the result.
  We now prove peace, that is C ∩ (I × I ) = ∅, The proof is by contradiction. Let π1
and π2 be two packages in F such that (π1 , π2 ) ∈ C. We have [π1 ] and [π2 ] in F and,
by definition of C , ([π1 ], [π2 ]) ∈ C . This contradicts peace in the quotient repository.
Hence, the result.
   Quotienting preserves flatness and keeps co-installability invariant.
   THEOREM 9.6. A set of packages  is weakly co-installable in the flat repository
(P, D, C) if and only if the set [] is weakly co-installable in the associated quotient
repository.
   PROOF. This is a direct consequence of Lemmas 9.4 and 9.5.
   THEOREM 9.7. If a repository is flat, then the corresponding quotiented repository is
flat as well.
    PROOF. Let (P, D, C) be a flat repository. We show that its quotient repository
(P , D , C ) is also flat.
    We first prove reflexivity, that is, C ≺C D . It is sufficient to prove that C D . Let
π1 , π2 ∈ P such that ([π1 ], [π2 ]) ∈ C . We need to prove that there exists a dependency
d ∈ D ([π1 ]) such that d ⊆ {[π1 ]}. By definition of C , there exists a pair of packages
(π3 , π4 ) ∈ C such that [π3 ] = [π1 ] and [π4 ] = [π2 ]. By reflexivity in the initial repository,
either {π3 } ∈ ∇C or there exists d ∈ D(π3 ) such that d ⊆ {π3 }. By Theorem 7.2, {π3 } ∈ ∇C .
Hence, there exists a dependency [d] in D ([π3 ]) = D ([π1 ]) such that [d] ⊆ {[π3 ]} = {[π1 ]},
as wanted.
    We now prove transitivity, that is, D;D ≺C D . Let π be a package. Let d = {π1 , . . . , πn}
a dependency such that [d] ∈ D ([π ]) (i.e., d ∈ D(π )).
    Let di be dependencies such that [di ] ∈ D ([πi ]) (i.e., di ∈ D(πi )) for each i. We need to
prove that either i [di ] ∈ ∇C (where ∇C is our class of always satisfiable dependencies
for the quotiented repository) or there exists d ∈ D ([π ]) such that d ⊆ i [di ]. We
assume that i [di ] ∈ ∇C and show we are in the second case. By Theorem 7.2, for
all [π ] ∈ i [di ], there exists a package [π ] ∈ P \ i [di ] such that ([π ], [π ]) ∈ C .
This means that we can define a function f which associates to each [π ] ∈ i [di ] a
package f ([π ]) ∈ [π ] such that there exists a package π such that [π ] ∈ P \ i [di ]
and ( f ([π ]), π ) ∈ C. Note that π ∈ P\ f ( i [di ]). Hence, for any dependency d , if
d ⊆ f ( i [di ]), then d ∈ ∇C . Now, by reflexivity and Theorem 7.2, both applied to
 f (π ), for each π ∈ di , there exists a dependency d ∈ D( f ([π ]) = D(π ) such that
d ⊆ { f ([π ])}. Thus, for all i, by transitivity applied to di and the corresponding d ,
there exists a dependency di ∈ D(πi ) such that di ⊆ f ( j [dj ]). By transitivity again,
applied to dependency d and dependencies di , there exists a dependency d ∈ D(π ) such
that d ⊆ f ( i [di ]). We have [d ] ∈ D ([π ]) and [d ] ⊆ [ f ( i [di ])] = i [di ] as wanted.
10. REFLEXIVE TRANSITIVE REDUCTION
It would not be suitable to graph directly a repository after flattening as it would
be polluted by dependencies which are not informative: due to reflexivity, we have
packages π where {π } ∈ D(π ), and some dependencies can be deduced from others by
transitivity. Thus, we perform a kind of reflexive transitive reduction of the dependency

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:24                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

function: given a repository (P, D, C), we find a minimal dependency function D with
                              =D
the same flattening (that is, D     ).
   Because of disjunctive dependencies, the complexity of finding an optimal solution
is high [Ausiello et al. 1983, 1986], in constrast with the case of reflexive transitive
reduction for graphs. As this is mostly a cosmetic issue for us, we use a simple nonop-
timal algorithm. As a first step, we iteratively remove dependencies which are implied
from other dependencies by transitivity, in a greedy way. The second step is to remove
all self dependencies, that is, dependencies d ∈ D(π ) such that π ∈ d. Co-installability
is left invariant by these operations.
   LEMMA 10.1. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. Let π ∈ P be a package and d ∈ D(π ) be a
dependency of this package. Let D = D\{π → d} be the dependency function D where
the dependency has been removed. If d ∈ (D ; D )(π ) then any healthy installation I of
repository (P, D , C) is a healthy installation of repository (P, D, C).
   PROOF. Let I be a healthy installation of (P, D , C). We show that it is a healthy
installation of (P, D, C). Peace is clear. We prove abundance.
   Let π ∈ I and d ∈ D(π ). We need to show that d ∩ I = ∅. If π = π or d = d, then
d ∈ D (π ) and the result holds by abundance in (P, D , C). We now show that d ∩ I = ∅.
As d ∈ (D ; D )(π ), there exists a dependency d = {π1 , . . . , πn} ∈ D (π ) and, for all i,
a dependency di ∈ D (πi ) such that d = 1≤i≤n di . By abundance, as π ∈ I, we have
d ∩ I = ∅, that is, there exists i such that πi ∈ I. Then, by abundance again, we have
di ∩ I = ∅. Hence, d ∩ I = ∅ as wanted.
  LEMMA 10.2. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. Let D be the dependency function defined
by D (π ) = {d ∈ D | π ∈ d}. Any healthy installation I of repository (P, D , C) is also a
healthy installation of repository (P, D, C).
   PROOF. Let I be a healthy installation of (P, D , C). We show that it is a healthy
installation of (P, D, C). Peace is clear. We prove abundance.
  Let π ∈ I and d ∈ D(π ). We need to show that d ∩ I = ∅. If π ∈ d, this is the case.
Otherwise, d ∈ D (π ), and we can conclude by healthiness of I in (P, D , C).

11. PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
We now have all the ingredients at hand to perform on any repository (P, D, C) the
transformations that allow us to produce the final repository, which is suitable both
for drawing a simplified graph, or performing efficiently various analysis related to
co-installability.

11.1. Extracting a Co-Installability Kernel
The complete algorithm is shown in Figure 14. We first flatten the initial repository
(Section 5), canonise the dependency function (Section 4), and remove the clearly irrel-
evant dependencies in ∇C (Section 7). In our implementation, all these operations are
performed simultaneously: this is significantly more efficient, as we have less depen-
dencies to consider while flattening. Then, we set the dependencies of broken packages
of the form of Figure 13 to the empty dependency ∅ (Section 8.4), and we remove
redundant conflicts (Section 8.3). As changing the dependencies of broken packages
may break flatness and removing may grow ∇C , these fives steps are iterated until no
change occurs. The process terminates as at each iteration either D(π ) is set to {∅} for
a package π or a conflict is removed. In practice, only two iterations are performed:
more iterations are only needed in unlikely configurations where dealing with a broken
package exposes another package as broken. Finally, we remove the conflict covered

        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:25




                                       Fig. 14. Simplifying the repository.

dependencies that can be safely dropped (Section 8.2) and the repository is quotiented
(Section 9).
  By combining the results of the previous sections, we obtain the fundamental result
on the simplification performed by the algorithm.
   THEOREM 11.1. The transformation performed by the simplification algorithm leaves
co-installability invariant. This algorithm produces a flat repository.
   PROOF. First, the quotienting operation performed at the end indeed produces a
repository, as the hypothesis of Lemma 9.1 are satisfied: if ∅ ∈ D(π ), then package π has
no conflicts thanks to redundant conflict removal; if {π } ∈ D(π ), then (π, π ) ∈ C thanks
to the dependency strengthening of clearly broken packages. These two properties are
preserved by dependency removal.
   We now show that once the loop in Figure 14 is exited, the repository remains
flat. Indeed, flattening produces a flat repository (Theorem 6.1 and Lemma 7.5),
which remains flat by canonisation and removal of dependencies in ∇C (Remark 7.4,
Lemmas 7.7 and 7.10). Then, the removal of conflict cover dependencies is defined so
as to preserve flatness, and quotienting preserves flatness (Lemma 9.7).
   To show that co-installability is left invariant, we rely heavily on the equivalence
between co-installability and weak co-installability in flat repositories (Lemma 6.3 and
Theorem 7.8), which let us use weak co-installability preservation results to prove co-
installability preservation. We also use the fact that healthiness preservation implies
co-installability preservation (Remark 2.2). Then, co-installability is left invariant by
flattening (Theorem 6.8), canonisation (Theorem 4.2), removal of dependencies in ∇C
(Theorem 7.11), dependency strengthening of clearly broken packages (Lemma 8.4
and Theorem 4.2), removal of redundant conflicts (Lemma 8.3 and Theorem 4.2), re-
moval of conflict covered dependencies (Lemma 8.1) and Theorem 4.2), and quotienting
(Theorem 9.6).
  As noticed here on a repository with no broken package, it is not necessary to iterate
the flattening phase, so the algorithm could run slighly faster; but finding all broken
packages is slower than performing the whole simplification, as it requires to call a SAT
solver repeatedly on large problems. On the other hand, repositories with good quality
control should contain no broken packages, and a simpler version of the simplification
algorithm could be used on them.

11.2. Computing Non-Co-Installable Pairs
We are now in a position to compute efficiently all the pairs of packages that cannot
be installed together, which are the strong conflicts of Di Cosmo and Boender [2010].
First, we notice that, when checking whether a package is installable, one only need to
consider features on which this package may depend.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:26                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

   LEMMA 11.2. Let (P, D, C) be a repository. If the package π ∈ P is weakly installable
in this repository, there exists a set of features F such that the configuration ({π }, F) is
healthy and for all π ∈ F, there exists a dependency d ∈ D(π ) such that π ∈ d.

   PROOF. Let π ∈ P be a weakly installable in repository (P, D, C). There exists a set of
features F such that ({π }, F ) is installable. We take F = F ∩ d∈D(π) d. Clearly, for all
π ∈ F, there exists a dependency d ∈ D(π ) such that π ∈ d. We now prove that ({π }, F)
is healthy.
   We first prove abundance. Let d ∈ D(π ). By abundance for configuration ({π }, F ),
d ∩ F = ∅. By definition of F, we have d ∩ F = d ∩ F . Hence, d ∩ F = ∅ as wanted.
   We now prove peace. By peace for configuration ({π }, F ), C ∩ (F × F ) = ∅. As F ⊆ F ,
we C ∩ (F × F) = ∅ as wanted.

  And then, we can prove that whenever two packages are not coinstallable in a flat
repository, they directly share a conflict.

   LEMMA 11.3. If the packages π1 and π2 are both weakly installable in a repository
(P, D, C) but the set {π1 , π2 } is not weakly co-installable in this repository, there must
exists d1 ∈ D(π1 ), d2 ∈ D(π2 ), π1 ∈ d1 , and π2 ∈ d2 such that (π1 , π2 ) ∈ C.

   PROOF. We prove the contrapositive. Let π1 and π2 be two packages in repository
(P, D, C). We assume that there is no dependencies d1 and d2 as specified here and show
that then the set {π1 , π2 } is not weakly co-installable.
  By Lemma 11.2, there exists sets of features F1 and F2 such that configurations
({π1 }, F1 ) and ({π2 }, F2 ) are healthy. Besides, F1 ⊆ d∈D(π1 ) d, and similarly for F2 . We
want to show that the set {π1 , π2 } is not weakly co-installable. We define F = F1 ∪ F2
and show that the configuration ({π1 , π2 }, F) is healthy.
  We first prove abundance. Let π ∈ {π1 , π2 } and d ∈ D(π ). We need to show that
d ∩ F = ∅. Suppose π = π1 . Then, by abundance, d ∩ F1 = ∅. Thus, d ∩ F = ∅ as
wanted. We get the same result when π = π2 .
  We now prove peace, that is, C ∩ (F × F) = ∅. The proof is by contradiction. Let π
and π in F such that (π, π ) ∈ C. If π and π are both in F1 , we reach a contradiction
as, by peace for configuration ({π1 }, F1 ), we have (π, π ) ∈ C. The same result holds if
they are both in F2 . We now assume that π ∈ F1 and π ∈ F2 . By definition of F1 , there
exists d1 ∈ D(π1 ) such that π ∈ D1 . Similarly, there exists d2 ∈ D(π2 ) such that π ∈ D2 .
Besides, (π, π ) ∈ C. This case is not possible, as this contradicts our initial assumption
that no such dependencies existed. The last case, where π ∈ F1 and π ∈ F2 , is not
possible as well.

  To find all non-co-installable pairs, we iterate over all such pairs (in the quotiented
repository, which is way smaller that the initial repository) and check co-installability
using a SAT solver. This way we can find all strong conflicts in a few seconds, versus
5 days in Di Cosmo and Boender [2010]. One major reason for this huge performance
improvement is that the transformations leading to the flat repository prune a large
part of the search space by removing many dependencies that would otherwise need
to be explored. Another part of the performance improvement comes from quotienting,
which makes it possible to test a large number of packages at once.
  Besides the usage in quality assurance advocated in Di Cosmo and Boender [2010],
this information can be used to give a sense of how much a package may be problem-
atic: we can count the number of packages it cannot be installed with, and use this
information to emphasize the nodes with more strong conflicts.

        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:27




                                              Fig. 15. Conflict clique.



11.3. Drawing a Simplified Graph
Before drawing the final repository, we perform the transitive reflexive reduction of
Section 10. The structure of the graph is then passed as input to the dot program of
the Graphviz toolkit [Ellson et al. 2001] that performs the layout.
   It is important to name nodes using meaningful representatives of each equivalence
class: we give preference to packages π that are directly involved in conflicts, as they
have more chances to be relevant for the repository maintainers; these are easy to find
by checking if {π } ∈ D(π ).
   There can be many packages all mutually in conflict. For instance, this is the case
of all mailer agents in Debian. We identify maximal such cliques and draw them in a
more concise way, as shown in Figure 15.
   We compute strong conflicts [Di Cosmo and Boender 2010] (non-co-installable pairs of
packages) as described in Section 11.2, and we colour nodes according to the logarithm
of the number of packages it is incompatible with. This way one can immediately
identify in the picture the nodes that prevent the installation of many other packages.

12. THE COINST TOOL
All the transformations described here have been implemented by Jérôme Vouillon in
the coinst tool, that can be used to extract and visualize the co-installability kernel
for any GNU/Linux distribution.
   The coinst program is a command line tool that takes package information from
standard input in either one of the most popular formats among GNU/Linux distribu-
tions, RPM and DEB; DEB format is the default, and RPM metadata can be specified
using the -rpm option.
   It writes on standard output:
—the list of equivalence classes, providing, for each, a selected representative package
 as well as all the packages it corresponds to;
—the list of packages that cannot be installed at all;
—the list of non-co-installable pairs: for each package, the tool lists all packages it can
 never be installed with.
   The co-installability kernel is written as a dot graph which can be passed to the
Graphviz tool suite [Ellson et al. 2001]; the file name can be specified with the
-o option.
   To unclutter the results, coinst omits by default packages with simple conflict con-
figurations, but one can use the -all option to include all packages in the output.
   A typical run of the tool will look like this.
  Compute. If you have all the metadata for Ubuntu Maverick in a directory
~/maverick-beta/, you can run the tool by issuing the command

   zcat ~/maverick-beta/*|coinst -all -o g.dot

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:28                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

  Layout. The graph can be laid out, using the Graphviz dot tool

  dot g.dot -o graph.dot

 Display. The result can be visualised using your choice of tool; we strongly recom-
mend to use the companion coinst viewer tool, though:

  coinst_viewer graph.dot

The -ignore option can be used to ignore a package, like in

zcat ~/testing-2010-08-22/*|coinst -ignore liboss-salsa-asound2 -o g.dot

To focus on a particular package, use the -root option.

zcat ~/testing-2010-08-22/*|coinst -root libhdf5-openmpi-1.8.4 -o g.dot

   Artifact Evaluation and Availability. coinst has been evaluated by the ESEC/FSE
2011 Artifact Evaluation Committee, and it has been awarded the Distinguished Ar-
tifact Award. Full source code, build and installation instructions as well as some
running examples of this tool can be found online at http://coinst.irill.org.


13. VISUALIZING UBUNTU
In the Figures 16, 17, and 18, we can see the result of applying the simplifications
described in this article to the main section of release 10.10 of the Ubuntu GNU/Linux
distribution; solid arrows indicate dependencies, dotted lines indicate conflicts, and
conflict cliques are represented with a node containing a # connected with dotted lines
to all packages in the clique. Of the thousands of packages, and dozens of thousands of
relationships, only a handful are left, and it is possible to read interesting information
directly on the graph.
   We give here just a few examples of what can be easily discovered at a glance without
needing to sift through thousands of hyperlinked web pages.
   In Figure 16, we see all the simple binary conflicts; for example, qt-x11-free-dbg is
in conflict with 24 packages which are equivalent to libqt4-dbg. The isolated node in
the bottom left, named abrowser, stands for 7049 packages that are always installable.
The four conflict cliques in Figure 17 and the conflict clique in Figure 18 are justified,
as they all correspond to incompatible implementations of libraries which are compiled
with different backends. In Figure 18, we see that package libjpeg8-dev is in conflict
with 28 other packages, which is likely to make it unconvenient to use. The core
package ubuntu-desktop is in conflict with a number of packages. These packages
should either be removed from the main section, or the dependencies should be revised.
For instance, packages foomatic-db and libgd2-noxpm should probably be removed. On
the other hand, package libsdl1.2debian-all provides a superset of the functionalities
of libsdl1.2debian-pulseaudio. Thus, it should not be in conflict with ubuntu-desktop.
Overall, there are still a few issues left in this repository, which are immediately
apparent when looking at the output of our tool. Since this repository corresponds to
a stable distribution that has undergone extensive testing and quality assurance, we
believe that this is clear proof of the effectiveness of our approach.
   Of course, our tool is even more useful for detecting issues proactively when the
distribution is in flux (during alpha and beta stages).

        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:29




                       Fig. 16. Output graph for Ubuntu 10.10 (main), simple conflicts.


14. RELATED WORKS
Ensuring the correct behaviour of components when composed into an assembly is
a fundamental concern for modern software architectures, and has been extensively
studied, but the maintenance of GNU/Linux distributions is quite a different subject,
that poses new challenges, and has started to be studied formally only recently. In this

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:30                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo




                   Fig. 17. Output graph for Ubuntu 10.10 (main), more complex cases.



section, we survey various related reserch ares, pointing out the differences with our
work, which is, to the best of our knowledge, completely novel.
  A large body of literature is dedicated to the dynamic aspects of component com-
position: knowing the behaviour of the components, one looks for means to determine
the behaviour of the system obtained by assembling them [de Alfaro and Henzinger
2001], or to ensure certain properties of the composition [Inverardi et al. 2000; Tivoli

        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:31




           Fig. 18. Output graph for Ubuntu 10.10 (main), last and largest connected component.


and Inverardi 2008]; when confronted with large systems, one may look for ways of
detecting automatically behavioural incompatibilities from the component source code
[McCamant and Ernst 2003, 2004], or to deploy and upgrade such systems [Ajmani
et al. 2006; Crameri et al. 2007].

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:32                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

   These are important issues, but in the world of GNU/Linux distributions we are still
very far from having any information available on the behaviour of each component
after installation, so it is too early to tackle this facet of the problem.
   On the other side, the mainstream research on static intermodule dependencies is es-
sentially performed at the level of the source code, with a different focus: in [Nagappan
and Ball 2007; Neuhaus et al. 2007], dependencies are automatically extracted from
huge sets of source code, and then used to predict failures, but not to identify issues
in the architecture of the code, unlike what our co-installability kernel allows to do;
in Yoon et al. [2007] and Yoon et al. [2008] dependencies are used as a guideline
for testing component-based systems; finally [Pei-Breivold et al. 2008], which shares
some concerns similar to ours, analyses the architectural dependencies to improve the
modularisation of the software architecture, but the size of the problem is sufficiently
small (some 20 components) to allow manual analysis and resolution of component
relationships, which is totally unfeasible in our case.
   In the area of quality assurance for large software projects, many authors have
correlated component dependencies with past failure rates, in order to predict future
failures [Nagappan and Ball 2007; Neuhaus et al. 2007; Zimmermann and Nagappan
2008]. The underlying hypothesis is that software “fault-proneness” of a component
is correlated to changes in components that are tightly related to it. In particular, if
a component A has many dependencies on a component B and the latter changes a
lot between versions, one would expect that errors propagate through the “component
network” reducing the reliability of A. A related interesting statistical model to predict
failures over time is the weighted time damp model that correlates recent changes to
software fault-proneness [Graves et al. 2000]. Social network methods [Hanneman and
Riddle 2005] have also been used to validate and predict the list of sensitive components
in the Windows platform [Zimmermann and Nagappan 2008].
   Our work is part of a recent research area that focuses on the properties of component
repositories that can be established automatically without looking at the source code
of the components, and without testing them: it is only assumed that each component
carries with itself a small amount of metadata describing what the component provides
and what it requires to be deployed and run; this metadata may be inferred automat-
ically using tools, or built manually, or a mixture of the two, but what is important to
notice is that this is the raw material which is used by researchers in this area.
   A first natural question in this setting is how difficult is to determine whether a
component can be installed at all: in Mancinelli et al. [2006], it has been shown that
this problem is NP-complete, but tractable in practice, for packages in GNU/Linux
distributions, and this result has been recently generalised to a wide class of component
systems, including OSGI bundles and Eclipse plugins [Abate et al. 2012a]. Since feature
diagrams, used in software product lines, can be encoded as component repositories
[Di Cosmo and Zacchiroli 2010], all the problems related to configuration management
can be equivalently stated in terms of repositories.
   An important issue for users of component repositories is computing installations
that optimise some given objective functions: various experiments have been done since
2006 [Tucker et al. 2007; Argelich et al. 2010; Trezentos et al. 2010; Di Cosmo et al.
2011; Gebser et al. 2011], and are now organised around the Mancoosi International
Solver Competition (http://www.mancoosi.org/misc-2011/); the results of this research
line have been used to develop next generation package mangers [Abate et al. 2011], and
several of these solvers are now available as plugins for the Debian package manager,
apt, starting from version 0.9.5.1.
   To help repository maintainers in their quality assurance task, It has have been
shown relevant the ability to identify what other components a package will always
need [Abate et al. 2009], what pairs of packages are incompatible [Di Cosmo and

        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:33

Boender 2010], and what component upgrades are more likely to impact a repository
[Abate et al. 2012b].
  The present work is a significant step forward in this direction, as it provides for
the first time a means to produce a very compact representation of all the sources of
incompatibilities in a repository that stem from its component metadata.
  It is also the first work, to our knowledge, that deals with the fine structure of reposi-
tories directly, and not through encodings: connections between component repositories
and Boolean satisfiability and constraint solving have been made only a few years ago
in the framework of GNU/Linux distributions [Mancinelli et al. 2006; Tucker et al.
2007] and the Eclipse platform [Le Berre and Parrain 2008], but these connections,
and other recent developments such as Abate et al. [2009], Di Cosmo and Boender
[2010], and Abate et al. [2012b] do not exploit the special structure of the dependencies
and conflicts found in a repository.

15. FUTURE WORK
The underlying structure of software component repositories exposed here can be
seen as a generalisation of some well-known mathematical structures: prime event
structure [Winskel 1987] correspond to repositories without loops and disjunctions;
directed hypergraphs [Ausiello et al. 1983] correspond to repositories without conflict
arcs, and Dual Horn theories correspond to repositories without conflicts [Dowling and
Gallier 1984].
  The notions of strongly flat and flat repository introduced in this article, together
with the simplification that preserve co-installability, can be used as building blocks
for tackling new interesting problems for the maintenance of component repositories.
A first natural question that we will investigate is how co-installability evolves along
with repository evolution: it is quite interesting for quality assurance to identify those
set of components that are co-installable in a repository, and are no longer co-installable
in a repository that has been updated with newer versions of some components.
  We will also continue to investigate the mathematical properties of the structure of
component repositories.

16. CONCLUSIONS
In this article, we have developed a theory and algorithms to extract from a reposi-
tory a co-installability kernel, which can be seen as a minimal representation of the
dependency and conflict relations: despite the apparent simplicity of the definition of
the problem, and the intuitive appealing of the hypergraph transformations we have
developed, the proofs of the crucial properties turned out to be surprisingly complex,
so we decided to machine check them using Coq [The Coq Development Team 2008].
  The results presented here allow to quickly identify non-co-installable components
in a repository, and pave the way to attacking significantly more complex problems
concerning software component repositories.
  More generally, we believe this work clearly shows the interest of the mathematical
objects underlying software repositories, which turn out to be amenable to an elegant
formal treatment and of high practical interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous referees for their suggestions and contributions.

REFERENCES
ABATE, P., BOENDER, J., DI COSMO, R., AND ZACCHIROLI, S. 2009. Strong dependencies between software compo-
    nents. In Proceedings of the ESEM. IEEE Press, 89–99.


ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
34:34                                                                               J. Vouillon and R. Di Cosmo

ABATE, P., DI COSMO, R., TREINEN, R., AND ZACCHIROLI, S. 2011. MPM: A modular package manager. In Proceed-
    ings of the 14th international ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on Component Based Software Engineering
    (CBSE’11). ACM, New York, 179–188.
ABATE, P., DI COSMO, R., TREINEN, R., AND ZACCHIROLI, S. 2012a. Dependency solving: A separate concern in
    component evolution management. J. Syst. Softw. 85, 10, (Special Issue: Automated Software Evolution),
    2228–2240.
ABATE, P., DI COSMO, R., TREINEN, R., AND ZACCHIROLI, S. 2012b. Learning from the Future of Component
    Repositories. In Proceedings of the 15th International ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on Component Based
    Software Engineering (CBSE-2012). ACM.
AJMANI, S., LISKOV, B., AND SHRIRA, L. 2006. Modular software upgrades for distributed systems. In Proceedings
    of the ECOOP, D. Thomas, Ed., Lecture Notes in Computer Science Series, vol. 4067, Springer, 452–476.
ARGELICH, J., LE BERRE, D., LYNCE, I., MARQUES-SILVA, J., AND RAPICAULT, P. 2010. Solving Linux upgradeability
    problems using boolean optimization. In LoCoCo: Logics for Component Configuration, EPTCS Series,
    vol. 29, 11–22.
AUSIELLO, G., D’ATRI, A., AND SACCÀ, D. 1983. Graph algorithms for functional dependency manipulation.
    J. ACM 30, 4, 752–766.
AUSIELLO, G., D’ATRI, A., AND SACCÁ, D. 1986. Minimal representation of directed hypergraphs. SIAM J.
    Comput. 15, 2, 418–431.
BAADER, F. AND NIPKOW, T. 1998. Term Rewriting and All That. Cambridge University Press.
BUNING, H. K. AND LETTMANN, T. 2002. Propositional logic: Deduction and algorithms. Studia Logica 71,
    247–258.
THE COQ DEVELOPMENT TEAM. 2008. The Coq Proof Assistant Reference Manual – Version V8.2.
CRAMERI, O., KNEZEVIC, N., KOSTIC, D., BIANCHINI, R., AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 2007. Staged deployment in mirage,
    an integrated software upgrade testing and distribution system. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 41, 6, 221–236.
DE ALFARO, L. AND HENZINGER, T. A. 2001. Interface automata. In Proceedings of the ESEC/SIGSOFT FSE.
DI COSMO, R. AND BOENDER, J. 2010. Using strong conflicts to detect quality issues in component-based complex
    systems. In Proceedings of the 3rd India Software Engineering Conference (ISEC’10). ACM, New York,
    163–172.
DI COSMO, R., DURAK, B., LEROY, X., MANCINELLI, F., AND VOUILLON, J. 2006a. Maintaining large software
    distributions: New challenges from the FOSS era. In Proceedings of the FRCSS’06 Workshop. EASST
    Newsletter.
DI COSMO, R., LHOMME, O., AND MICHEL, C. 2011. Aligning component upgrades. In Proceedings of the 2nd
    Workshop on Logics for Component Configuration, C. Drescher, I. Lynce, and R. Treinen, Eds., EPTCS 65,
    1–11.
DI COSMO, R., MANCINELLI, F., BOENDER, J., VOUILLON, J., DURAK, B., LEROY, X., PINHEIRO, D., TREZENTOS, P.,
    MORGADO, M., MILO, T., ZUR, T., SUAREZ, R., LIJOUR, M., AND TREINEN, R. 2006b. Report on formal mange-
    ment of software dependencies. Tech. rep., EDOS. Apr. EDOS project Deliverable 2.2. http://www.edos-
    project.org/xwiki/bin/download/Main/Deliverables/edos-wp2d2.pdf.
DI COSMO, R. AND VOUILLON, J. 2011. On software component co-installability. In Proceedings of the
    SIGSOFT/FSE’11 19th ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE-
    19) and the 13rd European Software Engineering Conference (ESEC-13). T. Gyimóthy and A. Zeller,
    Eds., ACM, 256–266.
DI COSMO, R. AND ZACCHIROLI, S. 2010. Feature diagrams as package dependencies. In Proceedings of SPLC.
    J. Bosch and J. Lee, Eds, Lecture Notes in Computer Science Series, vol. 6287, Springer, 476–480.
DOWLING, W. F. AND GALLIER, J. H. 1984. Linear-time algorithms for testing the satisfiability of propositional
    horn formulae. J. Log. Program. 1, 3, 267–284.
ELLSON, J., GANSNER, E., KOUTSOFIOS, L., NORTH, S., WOODHULL, G. 2001. Graphviz: Open source graph drawing
    tools. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, 483–484.
GEBSER, M., KAMINSKI, R., AND SCHAUB, T. 2011. aspcud: A linux package configuration tool based on answer
    set programming. In Proceedings of LoCoCo. C. Drescher, I. Lynce, and R. Treinen, Eds., EPTCS Series,
    vol. 65, 12–25.
GRAVES, T. L., KARR, A. F., MARRON, J. S., AND SIY, H. 2000. Predicting fault incidence using software change
    history. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 26, 7, 653–661.
HANNEMAN, R. A. AND RIDDLE, M. 2005. Introduction to Social Network Methods. University of California,
    Riverside.
INVERARDI, P., WOLF, A. L., AND YANKELEVICH, D. 2000. Static checking of system behaviors using derived
    component assumptions. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 9, 3, 239–272.




        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
On Software Component Co-Installability                                                                          34:35

LE BERRE, D. AND PARRAIN, A. 2008. On SAT technologies for dependency management and beyond. In Proceed-
    ings of SPLC (2). S. Thiel and K. Pohl, Eds., Lero International Science Centre, University of Limerick,
    Ireland, 197–200.
MANCINELLI, F., BOENDER, J., DI COSMO, R., VOUILLON, J., DURAK, B., LEROY, X., AND TREINEN, R. 2006. Managing
    the complexity of large free and open source package-based software distributions. In Proceedings of the
    ASE. IEEE Computer Society, 199–208.
MCCAMANT, S. AND ERNST, M. D. 2003. Predicting problems caused by component upgrades. In Proceedings of
    ESEC/SIGSOFT FSE. ACM, 287–296.
MCCAMANT, S. AND ERNST, M. D. 2004. Early identification of incompatibilities in multi-component upgrades.
    In Proceedings of ECOOP. M. Odersky, Ed., Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3086, Springer,
    440–464.
NAGAPPAN, N. AND BALL, T. 2007. Using software dependencies and churn metrics to predict field failures: An
    empirical case study. In Proceedings of ESEM’07, 364–373.
NEUHAUS, S., ZIMMERMANN, T., HOLLER, C., AND ZELLER, A. 2007. Predicting vulnerable software components.
    In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS’07). P. Ning,
    S. D. C. di Vimercati, and P. F. Syverson, Eds., ACM, 529–540.
PEI-BREIVOLD, H., CRNKOVIC, I., LAND, R., AND LARSSON, S. 2008. Using dependency model to support software
    architecture evolution. In Proceedings of EVOL’08.
TIVOLI, M. AND INVERARDI, P. 2008. Failure-free coordinators synthesis for component-based architectures.
    Sci. Comput. Program. 71, 3, 181–212.
TREINEN, R. AND ZACCHIROLI, S. 2008. Solving package dependencies: From EDOS to Mancoosi. In Proceedings
    of 9th Annual Conference of the Debian Project (DebConf8). 18–43.
TREZENTOS, P., LYNCE, I., AND OLIVEIRA, A. L. 2010. APT-PBO: Solving the software dependency problem using
    pseudo-Boolean optimization. In Proceedings of ASE. C. Pecheur, J. Andrews, and E. D. Nitto, Eds.,
    ACM, 427–436.
TUCKER, C., SHUFFELTON, D., JHALA, R., AND LERNER, S. 2007. Opium: Optimal package install/uninstall manager.
    In Proceedings of ICSE. IEEE Computer Society, 178–188.
WINSKEL, G. 1987. Event structures. In Petri Nets: Applications and Relationships to Other Models of Con-
    currency, W. Brauer, W. Reisig, and G. Rozenberg, Eds., Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 255,
    Springer Berlin, 325–392.
YOON, I.-C., SUSSMAN, A., MEMON, A., AND PORTER, A. 2007. Direct-dependency-based software compatibility
    testing. In Proceedings of ASE’07. ACM, New York, 409–412.
YOON, I.-C., SUSSMAN, A., MEMON, A., AND PORTER, A. 2008. Effective and scalable software compatibility testing.
    In Proceedings of ISSTA’08. ACM, New York, 63–74.
ZIMMERMANN, T. AND NAGAPPAN, N. 2008. Predicting defects using network analysis on dependency graphs. In
    Proceedings of ICSE’08. ACM, 531–540.

Received November 2011; revised July 2012; accepted October 2012




ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 22, No. 4, Article 34, Pub. date: October 2013.
