Versatility and Unix Semantics
in Namespace Unification
CHARLES P. WRIGHT, JAY DAVE, PUJA GUPTA, HARIKESAVAN KRISHNAN,
DAVID P. QUIGLEY, EREZ ZADOK, and MOHAMMAD NAYYER ZUBAIR
Stony Brook University


Administrators often prefer to keep related sets of files in different locations or media, as it is
easier to maintain them separately. Users, however, prefer to see all files in one location for conve-
nience. One solution that accommodates both needs is virtual namespace unification—providing a
merged view of several directories without physically merging them. For example, namespace uni-
fication can merge the contents of several CD-ROM images without unpacking them, merge binary
directories from different packages, merge views from several file servers, and more. Namespace
unification can also enable snapshotting by marking some data sources read-only and then utilizing
copy-on-write for the read-only sources. For example, an OS image may be contained on a read-only
CD-ROM image—and the user’s configuration, data, and programs could be stored in a separate
read-write directory. With copy-on-write unification, the user need not be concerned about the two
disparate file systems.
    It is difficult to maintain Unix semantics while offering a versatile namespace unification sys-
tem. Past efforts to provide such unification often compromised on the set of features provided or
Unix compatibility—resulting in an incomplete solution that users could not use.
    We designed and implemented a versatile namespace unification system called Unionfs. Unionfs
maintains Unix semantics while offering advanced namespace unification features: dynamic inser-
tion and removal of namespaces at any point in the merged view, mixing read-only and read-write
components, efficient in-kernel duplicate elimination, NFS interoperability, and more. Since re-
leasing our Linux implementation, it has been used by thousands of users and over a dozen Linux
distributions, which helped us discover and solve many practical problems.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: D.4.3 [Operating Systems]: File Systems Management—File
organization; directory structures; E.5 [Data]: Files—Organization/structure; H.3.2 [Information
Storage and Retrieval]: Information Storage—File organization
General Terms: Design, Experimentation, Management
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Namespace management, unification, directory merging, stack-
able file systems, snapshotting




This work was partially made possible by an NSF CAREER award EIA-0133589, NSF Trusted
Computing award CCR-0310493, and HP/Intel gifts numbers 87128 and 88415.1.
Authors’ address: C. P. Wright, J. Dave, P. Gupta, H. Krishnan, D. P. Quigley, E. Zadok, M. N.
Zubair, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794; email: ezk@cs.sunysb.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or direct commercial
advantage and that copies show this notice on the first page or initial screen of a display along
with the full citation. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers,
to redistribute to lists, or to use any component of this work in other works requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be requested from Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 1515
Broadway, New York, NY 10036 USA, fax: +1 (212) 869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.

C 2006 ACM 1553-3077/06/0200-0074 $5.00


ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006, Pages 74–105.
                  Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification             •     75

1. INTRODUCTION
For ease of management, different but related sets of files are often located in
multiple places. Users, however, find it inconvenient to access such split files;
users prefer to see everything in one place. One proposed solution is to virtually
merge—or unify—the views of different directories (recursively) such that they
appear to be one tree; this is done without physically merging the disparate
directories. Such namespace unification has the benefit of allowing the files to
remain physically separate, but to appear as if they reside in one location. The
collection of merged directories is called a union, and each physical directory is
called a branch. When creating the union, each branch is assigned a precedence
and access permissions (i.e., read-only or read-write). At any point in time new
branches may be inserted, or existing branches may be removed from the union.
There are many possible uses for namespace unification. We explore six of them
next.

— Modern computing systems contain numerous files that are part of many
  software distributions. There are often several reasons to spread those files
  among different locations. For example, a wide variety of packages may be
  installed in separate subtrees under/opt. Rather than requiring users to
  include large numbers of directories in their PATH environment variable,
  the administrator can simply unify the various components in /opt.
— Another example of unification is merging the contents of several file servers.
  In a large organization, a user may have files on a variety of servers (e.g.,
  their personal files on one, and each project could have its own server). How-
  ever, on workstations it should appear as if all the user’s files are in a com-
  mon location regardless of which server the files are really on. A standard
  mount cannot be used because mounting two file systems in the same place
  would hide the files that were mounted first. A namespace unification file
  system can simply unify the various mount points into a common directory.
  Lastly, file servers may come online or go offline at any time. Therefore, a
  namespace unification file system must be able to add and remove branches
  dynamically.
— Large software collections are often distributed as split CD-ROM images
  because of the media’s size limitations. However, users often want to down-
  load a single package from the distribution. To meet both needs, mirror sites
  usually have both the ISO images and the individual packages. This wastes
  the disk space and bandwidth because the same data is stored on disk and
  downloaded twice. For example, on our group’s FTP server, we keep physical
  copies of the Fedora distribution only as ISO images; we loopback-mount the
  ISO images, and then we unify their contents to provide direct access to the
  RPMs and SRPMs.
— It is becoming more and more common for OS software to be distributed on
  live CDs. Live CDs are bootable CD-ROMs (or DVDs) that contain an entire
  operating system in compressed format. Live CDs require no installation
  process, which simplifies administration: Upgrading a machine is as simple
  as replacing the old CD with a new CD. The major drawbacks of live CDs are
                                      ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
76      •      C. Wright et al.

  that the file system is read-only, and configuration changes are lost after a
  reboot. Unionfs can help solve both of these problems. To support the illusion
  of a writable CD-ROM, a high-priority RAM disk and the low-priority CD
  image can be unified. When a user tries to write to a file on the CD-ROM,
  Unionfs transparently copies the file to the higher-priority RAM disk. If the
  RAM disk is replaced with a persistent read-write file system, such as a USB
  flash drive (or hard disk), then configuration changes can be preserved across
  reboots.
— Snapshotting is a useful tool for system administrators, who need to
  know what changes are made to the system while installing new software
  [McKusick and Ganger 1999; Hitz et al. 1994]. If the installation failed, the
  software does not work as advertised, or is not needed, then the administrator
  often wants to revert to a previous good system state. Unification can pro-
  vide a file system snapshot that carries out the installation of new software
  in a separate directory. Snapshotting is accomplished by adding an empty
  high-priority branch, and then marking the existing data as read-only. If
  any changes are made to the read-only data, Unionfs transparently makes
  the changes on the new high-priority branch. The system administrators
  can then examine the exact changes made to the system and easily keep or
  remove them.
— Similarly, when an intrusion detection system (IDS) detects a possible intru-
  sion, it should prevent further changes to the file system, while legitimate
  users should be able to perform their tasks. Furthermore, false alarms can
  be very common, so the system should take some steps to protect itself (by
  carefully tracking the changes made by that process), but not outright kill
  the suspicious process. If an intrusion is suspected, then the IDS can create
  snapshots that the system administrator can examine afterward. If the sus-
  pected intrusion turns out to be a false positive, the changes can be merged
  into the file system. In addition to file system snapshots, Unionfs also sup-
  ports sandboxing. Sandboxes essentially create a namespace fork at the time
  a snapshot is taken. Processes are divided into two (or more) classes: bad pro-
  cesses in which the IDS suspects are intrusions, and all other processes are
  good. The good processes write to one snapshot, and the bad processes write
  to another. The good processes see only the existing data and changes made
  by other good processes. Likewise, the bad processes see only the existing
  data and changes made by bad procceses. The result is that bad data is never
  exposed to good processes.

   Although the concept of virtual namespace unification appears simple, it is
difficult to design and implement in a manner that fully complies with expected
Unix semantics. The various problems include handling files with identical
names in the merged directory, maintaining consistency while deleting files
that may exist in multiple directories, handling a mix of read-only and read-
write directories, and more. Given these difficulties, it is not surprising that
none of the past implementations solved all problems satisfactorily.
   We have designed and built Unionfs, a namespace unification file system
that addresses all of the known complexities of maintaining Unix semantics
ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                   Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification             •     77

without compromising versatility and the features offered. We support two file
deletion modes that address even partial failures. We allow efficient insertion
and deletion of arbitrary read-only or read-write directories into the union.
Unionfs includes efficient in-kernel handling of files with identical names, a
careful design that minimizes data movement across branches, several modes
for permission inheritance, and support for snapshots and sandboxing. We have
publicly released Unionfs, and it has been downloaded by thousands of users
and is in use by over a dozen other projects. This wide dissemination has helped
us to discover important design details that previous implementations have not
considered. For example, maintaining a persistent and unique inode mapping,
and resuming directory reads over NFS are both crucial for unifying distributed
namespaces. We have also developed efficient yet easy-to-use user-space man-
agement utilities, which are essential for a production-quality system.
   The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our overall
design and Section 3 elaborates on the details of each Unionfs operation. Sec-
tion 4 surveys related work. Section 5 compares the features of Unionfs with
those offered by previous systems. We show that Unionfs provides new fea-
tures as well as useful features from past work. Section 6 analyzes Unionfs’s
performance. We show a small overhead of 0.2–1.5% for normal workloads,
and acceptable performance even under demanding workloads. We conclude in
Section 7 and suggest future directions.


2. DESIGN
Although the concept of virtual namespace unification appears simple, it is dif-
ficult to design and implement it in a manner that fully complies with expected
Unix semantics. There are four key problems when implementing a unification
file system.
    The first problem is that two or more unified directories can contain files with
the same name. If such directories are unified, then duplicate names must not
be returned to user-space or they could break many programs. The solution is
to record all names seen in a directory and skip over duplicate names. However,
that solution can consume memory and CPU resources for what is normally a
simpler and stateless directory-reading operation. Moreover, just because two
files may have the same name, it does not mean they have the same data or
attributes. Unix files have only one data stream, one set of permissions, and one
owner; but in a unified view, two files with the same name could have different
data, permissions, or even owners. Even with duplicate name elimination, the
question still remains which attributes should be used. The solution to this
problem often involves defining a priority ordering of the individual directories
being unified. When several files have the same name, files from the directory
with a higher priority take precedence.
    The second problem relates to file deletion. Since files with the same name
could appear in the directories being merged, it is not enough to delete only
one instance of the file because that could expose the other files with the same
name, resulting in confusion as a successfully deleted file still appears to exist.
Two solutions to this problem are often proposed. First, we could try to delete
                                       ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
78      •      C. Wright et al.

all instances. However, this multideletion operation is difficult to achieve atom-
ically. Moreover, some instances may not be deletable because they could reside
in read-only directories. Alternatively, rather than deleting the files, we could
insert a whiteout, a special high-priority entry that marks the file as deleted.
File system code that sees a whiteout entry for file F behaves as if F does not
exist.
   The third problem involves mixing read-only and read-write directories in
the union. When users want to modify a file that resides in a read-only directory,
the file must be copied to a higher-priority directory and modified there, an act
called a copyup. Copyups only solve part of the problem of mixing read-write and
read-only directories in the union, because they address data and not metadata.
Past unification file systems enforced a simpler model: all directories except the
highest-priority one are read-only. Forcing all but the highest-priority branch
to be read-only tends to clutter the highest-priority directory with copied-up
entries for all of the remaining directories. Over time, the highest-priority di-
rectory becomes a de facto merged copy of the remaining directories’ contents,
defeating the physical separation goal of namespace unification.
   The fourth problem involves name cache coherency. For a union file system
to be useful, it should allow additions to and deletions from the set of unified
directories. Such dynamic insertions and deletions in an active, in-use names-
pace can result in incoherency of the directory name-lookup cache. One solution
to this problem is to simply restrict insertions into the namespace to a new
highest-priority directory.
   We designed Unionfs to address these problems while supporting n underly-
ing branches or directories with the following three goals:

— No artificial constraints on branches. To allow Unionfs to be used in as many
  applications as possible, we do not impose any unnecessary constraints on
  the order or attributes of branches. We allow a mix of multiple read-write and
  read-only branches. Any branch can be on any file system type. We support
  dynamic insertion and removal of branches in any order. The only restriction
  we impose is that in a read-write union, the highest-priority branch must be
  read-write. This restriction is required because a highest-priority read-only
  branch cannot be overridden by another branch.
— Maintain Unix Semantics. One of our primary goals is to maintain Unix
  semantics so that existing applications continue to work. A Unionfs operation
  can include operations across several branches which should succeed or fail
  as a unit. Returning partial errors can confuse applications and also leave
  the system in an inconsistent state. Through a careful ordering of operations,
  a Unionfs operation succeeds or fails as a unit.
— Scalability. We wanted Unionfs to have a minimal overhead, even though
  it consists of multiple branches across different file systems. Therefore, we
  only look up a file in the highest-priority branch unless we need to modify the
  file in other branches; once found, we use the OS caches to save the lookup
  results. We delay the creation of directories that are required for copyup. We
  leave files in the branch in which they already exist and avoid copying data
  across branches until required.
ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                      Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification                •     79




Fig. 1. Unionfs: A stackable fan-out file system can access N different branches directly. In this
example, the branches are a read-write Ext2 file system, a read-only Ext2 file system, a read-write
NFS file system, and a read-only ISO9660 file system.


    Next, we describe the following three general aspects of Unionfs’s design:
stacking VFS operations, error propagation, copyup and parent directory cre-
ation, and whiteouts. We provide operational details of Unionfs in Section 3.
    Stacking VFS Operations. Stackable file systems are a technique to layer
new functionality on existing file systems [Zadok and Nieh 2000]. A stackable
file system is called by the VFS like other file systems, but in turn calls another
file system instead of performing operations on a backing store such as a disk or
an NFS server. Before calling the lower-level file system, stackable file systems
can modify the operation, for example, by encrypting data before it is written
to disk.
    Unionfs is a stackable file system that operates on multiple underlying
file systems. It has an n-way fan-out architecture, as shown in Figure 1
[Rosenthal 1990; Heidemann and Popek 1994]. The benefit of this approach
is that Unionfs has direct access to all underlying directories or branches, in
any order. A fan-out structure improves performance and also makes our code
base more applicable to other fan-out file systems like replication, load balanc-
ing, etc.
    Unionfs merges the contents of several underlying directories. In Unionfs,
each branch is assigned a unique precedence so that the view of the union
presented to the user is always unambiguous. An object to the left has a higher
precedence than an object to the right. The leftmost object has the highest
precedence.
    For regular files, devices, and symlinks, Unionfs performs operations only
on the leftmost object. This is because applications expect only a single stream
of data when accessing a file. For directories, Unionfs combines the files from
each directory and performs operations on each directory. Operations are or-
dered from left to right, which preserves the branch precedence. A delete oper-
ation in Unionfs may be performed on multiple branches. Unionfs starts delete
operations in reverse order, from right to left, so that if any operation fails,
Unionfs does not modify the leftmost entry until all lower-priority operations
have succeeded. This preserves Unix semantics even if the operation fails in
some branches, because the user-level view remains unchanged. For all opera-
tions in Unionfs, we take advantage of existing VFS locking to ensure atomicity.
                                             ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
80      •      C. Wright et al.

    Error Propagation. Unionfs may operate on one or more branches, so the
success or failure of any operation depends on the successes and failures in
multiple branches. If part of an operation fails, then Unionfs gives the operation
another chance to succeed. For example, if a user attempts to create a file and
gets an error (e.g., a read-only file system error), then Unionfs attempts to
create the file to the left.
    Copyup and Parent Directory Creation. Unionfs attempts to leave a file on
the branch where it initially existed. However, Unionfs transparently supports
a mix of read-only and read-write branches. Instead of returning an error from
a write operation on a read-only branch, Unionfs moves the failed operation to
the left by copying the file to a higher-priority branch, a copyup.
    To copyup a file, Unionfs may have to create an entire directory structure
(e.g., to create the file a/b/c/d, it creates a, b, and c first). Unlike BSD union
mounts, which clutter the highest-priority branch by creating the directory
structure on every lookup [Pendry and McKusick 1995], Unionfs creates direc-
tories only when they are required.
    An important factor for security is the permissions of the copied-up files and
the intermediate directories created. Unionfs provides three modes for choosing
permissions: COPYUP OWNER sets the mode and the owner to that of the original
file; COPYUP CONST sets the mode and the owner to fixed ones specified at mount
time; and COPYUP CURRENT sets the mode and the owner based on the current
umask and owner of the process that initiated the copyup. These policies ful-
fill the requirements of different sites. COPYUP OWNER provides the security of
the original file and preserves Unix semantics, but charges the owner’s quota.
COPYUP CONST allows administrators to control the new owner and mode of copied
up files. COPYUP CURRENT is useful when the current user should have full per-
missions on the copied-up files, and affects the current user’s quota.
    The Unix permission model allows situations where a user can change a file,
but cannot change the directory in which it resides. However, if the said file
exists on a read-only branch, then it must be copied-up, which involves creat-
ing a new file (i.e., modifying the directory). To solve this problem, we change
the current process’s file-system user ID to the owner of the directory before
creating the file, and restore it to the original afterward. We have previously
used this technique to implement ad hoc groups in our stackable encryption file
system [Wright et al. 2003]. Because only the copyup operation is performed
with the elevated permissions and Unionfs already checked the permissions on
the copied-up file, this method does not introduce any security holes.
    Whiteouts. Whiteouts are used to hide files or directories in lower-priority
branches. Unionfs creates whiteouts as zero length files, named .wh.F where
F is the name of the file or directory to be hidden. This uses an inode, but no data
blocks. The whiteouts are created in the current branch, or in a higher-priority
branch of the current branch. One or more whiteouts of a file can exist in a lower-
priority branch, but a file and its whiteout cannot exist in the same branch.
Depending on a mount-time option, Unionfs creates whiteouts in unlink-like
operations, as discussed in Sections 3.5 and 3.6. Whiteouts for files are created
atomically by renaming F to .wh.F , and then truncating .wh.F . For other
types of objects, .wh.F is created, and then the original object is removed.
ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                   Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification              •     81

3. OPERATIONAL DETAILS
In this section, we describe individual Unionfs operations. First, we describe
Linux VFS objects in Section 3.1. We describe lookup and open in Section 3.2,
directory reading in Section 3.3, creating new objects in Section 3.4, deleting
objects in Section 3.5, rename in Section 3.6, dynamic branch insertion and
deletion in Section 3.7, user-space utilities in Section 3.8, and sandboxing using
split-view caches in Section 3.9.

3.1 VFS Objects
We discuss Unionfs using Linux terminology. Unionfs defines operations for
four VFS objects: the superblock, the inode, the file, and the directory entry.
The superblock stores information about the entire file system, such as used
space, free space, and the location of other objects (e.g., inode objects). The su-
perblock operations include unmounting a file system and deleting an inode.
The inode object is a physical instance of a file that stores the file data and
attributes, such as owner, permissions, and size. Operations that manipulate
the file system namespace, like create, unlink, and rename, are inode opera-
tions. The file object represents an open instance of a file. Each user-space file
descriptor maps to a file object. The file operations primarily deal with opening,
reading, and writing a file. The directory entry, also called a dentry, represents
a cached name for an inode in memory. On lookup, a dentry object is created
for every component in the path. If hard links exist for a file, then an inode
may have multiple names, and hence, multiple dentries. The kernel maintains
a dentry cache (dcache), which in turn controls the inode cache. The dentry op-
erations include revalidating dentries, comparing names, and hashing names.

3.2 Lookup and Open
Lookup is one of the most important inode operations. It takes a directory inode
and a dentry within that directory as arguments, and finds the inode for that
dentry. If the name is not found, it returns a negative dentry—a dentry that does
not have any associated inode. Only the leftmost file is used for read-only meta-
data operations, or operations that only modify data. Unionfs proceeds from
left to right in the branches where the parent directory exists. If the leftmost
entry that is found is a file, then Unionfs terminates the search, preventing
unnecessary lookups in branches to the right. We call this early termination a
lazy lookup. In operations that operate on all underlying files, such as unlink,
Unionfs calls the lower-level lookup method on each branch to the right of the
leftmost file to populate the branches that were skipped.
   Unionfs provides a unified view of directories in all branches. Therefore, if
the leftmost entry is a directory, Unionfs looks it up in all branches. If there is
no instance of the file for the directory that Unionfs is looking up, it returns a
negative dentry that points to the leftmost parent dentry.
   In each branch, Unionfs also looks up the whiteout entry with the name of
the object it is looking for. If it finds a whiteout, it stops the lookup operation. If
Unionfs found only negative dentries before the whiteout dentry, then lookup
returns a negative dentry for the file or the directory. If Unionfs found any
                                        ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
82      •      C. Wright et al.

dentries with corresponding inodes (i.e., objects that exist), then it returns only
those entries.
    Inode Numbers. If an object is found during lookup, then the read inode
method is called to instantiate the corresponding in-memory inode object. A
key question that lookup must answer is what inode number to assign to the
newly instantiated Unionfs inode. There are two key requirements for inode
numbers: (1) the inode number must be unique within the Unionfs file system,
and (2) the inode number should be persistent. The first requirement, unique-
ness, stems from the VFS using the inode number as a key to read the on-
disk inode and user-level applications using the inode to identify files uniquely.
User-level applications retrieve files’ inode numbers to detect hard links. If
two files on the same file system have the same inode number, then applica-
tions assume that the files are the same. If a union contains files from two
branches on separate file systems, then it is possible for the lower-level inode
numbers to “trick” the application into losing one of the files. The second re-
quirement, persistence, is motivated by support for NFS mounts and hard link
detection. If inode numbers change, then the kernel NFS server returns a “stale
NFS file handle” to NFS clients. User-level applications like diff compare in-
ode numbers to check if two files are the same, and if two files have different
inode numbers, then diff must compare the whole file, even if there are no
differences.
    To solve these two problems, Unionfs maintains a persistent map of unique
inode numbers. When a file is first seen by Unionfs, it is assigned a unique
Unionfs inode number and entered into two maps: a forward map and a reverse
map. The forward map translates the Unionfs inode number to the lower-level
inode number and the corresponding branch. The Unionfs inode number is also
stored in a reverse map for each lower-level file system. The reverse map is used
by the lookup and readdir operations. When a file or directory is subsequently
accessed, Unionfs uses the lower-level inode as a key in the reverse map to
retrieve the correct Unionfs inode number. This prevents utilities like tar from
mistakenly identifying two distinct files as the same file, or utilities like diff
from identifying two different files as the same file. NFS file handles on Linux
identify objects using inode numbers. Therefore, when Unionfs is presented
with an inode number, it must be able to identify which object it belongs to. The
forward map can be used to retrieve the corresponding lower-level object for
NFS requests. We have not yet implemented this feature for NFS file handles,
but we describe a design for it in Section 7.1.
    The forward and reverse maps have a low-space overhead. The forward map
has a constant overhead of 4,377 bytes, and an overhead of 9 bytes per file or
directory in the Union. If we assume the average file size is 52,982 bytes (this
is the average size on our group’s file server’s /home directory, which has over
five million files belonging to 82 different users), then the space overhead is
0.017% of the used disk space. The reverse maps each have a fixed overhead
of 64 bytes, and an additional 8 bytes per inode allocated on the lower-level
file system. Most FFS-like file systems allocate a fixed number of inodes per
block. For example, Ext2 allocates one inode per 4096-byte block, by default.
This means that the reverse maps have a space overhead of just under 0.2%
ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                   Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification             •     83

of the file system size. Overall, the space overhead for the forward and reverse
map is negligible at around 0.212%.
   Open. When opening a file, Unionfs opens the lower-level non-negative den-
tries that are returned by the lookup operation. Unionfs gives precedence to the
leftmost file, so it opens only the leftmost file. However, for directories, Unionfs
opens all directories in the underlying branches in preparation for readdir, as
described in Section 3.3. If the file is in a read-only branch and is being opened
for writing, then Unionfs copies-up the file and opens the newly copied-up file.


3.3 Readdir
The readdir operation returns directory entries in an open directory. A di-
rectory in Unionfs can contain multiple directories from different branches,
and therefore, a readdir operation in Unionfs is composed of multiple readdir
operations.
   Priority is given to the leftmost file or directory. Therefore, Unionfs’s readdir
starts from the leftmost branch. Unionfs eliminates duplicate instances of files
or directories with the same name in the kernel. Any whiteout entry to the
left hides the file or the directory to the right. To eliminate duplicates, Unionfs
records the names of files, directories, and whiteouts that have already been
returned in a hash table that is bound to the open instance of the directory (i.e.,
in the kernel file structure). Unionfs does not return names that have already
been recorded.
   Previous unification file systems either did not perform duplicate elimination
or performed it in user-level (e.g., in the C library). Duplicate elimination is im-
portant because most user-space applications cannot properly handle duplicate
names (e.g., a utility like cp might copy the data twice). User-level duplicate
elimination is not sufficient because Unionfs could not be exported over NFS.
Moreover, on Linux there are many C libraries available, and changing all of
them is not practical.
   It is essential to find and add entries in the hash table efficiently. We use
fixed-sized hash elements that are allocated from a dedicated kernel cache.
To reduce collisions, each directory-reading operation computes an appropriate
hash table size. The first time a directory is read, the size of the hash table is
determined heuristically based on the size in bytes of the lower-level directories.
As entries are added, a counter is incremented. When the directory-reading
operation completes, this value is stored for the next operation. On subsequent
directory-reading operations, the hash table is automatically sized based on
this value.
   On Unix, most processes that read directories open the directory, read each
entry sequentially, and then close the directory. In a traditional Unix directory,
processes can use the seek system call to obtain the current offset in a direc-
tory, then close the directory. After reopening the directory, the process can call
seek to resume reading from previously returned offset. Unionfs directories are
different from most directories in that it is only possible to seek to the current
offset (programs such as ls require this functionality) or the beginning of the
directory.
                                       ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
84      •      C. Wright et al.

   Offsets have the further requirement that they are unique, and should also
be increasing. The underlying file systems may use all 32-bits of the offset and
there are several underlying directories, so it is not possible to create a simple
one-to-one function between Unionfs directory offset and the directory offset
on a given branch. Unionfs uses an artificial directory offset that consists of a
12-bit unique identifier, and a 20-bit count of returned entries.
   Special care must be taken to support directory-reading operations over NFS.
The NFS (v2 and v3) protocol is stateless, so there is no concept of an open or
closed file. For each individual directory-reading operation, the in-kernel NFS
server reopens the directory, seeks to the last offset, reads a number of entries,
records the offset, and closes the directory. To support reading directories over
NFS, Unionfs maintains a cache of partially-read directories’ state indexed by
the directory offset and a unique identifier.
   When a directory is closed, if there are unread entries, then the current hash
table of names is stored in the in-memory inode structure indexed by the current
offset. When a seek operation is performed on the directory, the 12-bit identifier
is used to find the appropriate structure. The 20-bit offset is also compared and
an error is returned if they do not match. If the partially-read directory state
is not used for more than five seconds, then it is expunged. This prevents state
from partially-read directories from consuming too much kernel memory, but
directory-reading operations cannot be resumed after a five second pause.


3.4 Creating New Objects
A file system creates objects with create, mkdir, symlink, mknod, and link.
Although these operations instantiate different object types, their behavior is
fundamentally similar.
   Unionfs creates a new object using the negative dentry returned by the
lookup operation. However, a negative dentry may exist because a whiteout
is hiding lower-priority files. If there is no whiteout, then Unionfs instanti-
ates the new object. A file and its whiteout cannot exist in the same branch. If
Unionfs is creating a file and finds a whiteout, it renames the whiteout to the
new file. The rename of the whiteout to the file ensures the atomicity of the
operation and avoids any partial failures that could occur during unlink and
create operations.
   For mkdir, mknod, and symlink, Unionfs instantiates the new object and
then removes the whiteout. To ensure atomicity, the inode of the directory is
locked during this procedure. However, if mkdir succeeds, the newly-created
directory merges with any directories to the right which were hidden by the
removed whiteout. This would break Unix semantics, as a newly-created di-
rectory is not empty. When a new directory is created after removing a white-
out, Unionfs creates whiteouts in the newly-created directory for all the files
and subdirectories to the right. To ensure that the on-disk state is consistent
in case of a power or hardware failure, before mounting Unionfs, a high-level
fsck can be run. Any objects that exist, along with their whiteout, are de-
tected, and can optionally be corrected—just like when a standard fsck detects
inconsistencies.
ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                   Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification             •     85

3.5 Deleting Objects
Unionfs supports two deletion modes: DELETE ALL and DELETE WHITEOUT. We de-
scribe each mode with pseudocode. We use the following notations:
— L X Index of the leftmost branch where X exists
— R X Index of the rightmost branch where X exists
— X̄ Whiteout entry for X
— X [i] lower-level object of X in branch i
  Additionally, we omit most error handling to both conserve space and yet
provide the essence of each function.
  To create a whiteout, we use the function described by the following pseudo-
code:
1 create whiteout(X, i)
2   while (i ≥ 1) {
3     if create X̄ succeeds then return
4     i--
5   }
   As shown in lines 2–4, Unionfs attempts to create a whiteout starting in
branch i. If the creation of X̄ fails on i, then Unionfs attempts to create X̄ to
the left of branch i on branch i −1. If the operation fails, then Unionfs continues
to attempt the creation of the whiteout, until it succeeds in a branch to the left
of branch i.
   The following pseudocode describes unlink:
1 unionfs unlink(X)
2   if mode is delete all {
3     for i = R X downto L X
4       if X[i] exists then unlink(X[i])
5   }
6   if an error occurred or mode is delete whiteout
7     create whiteout(X, L X )
   In the unlink operation for DELETE WHITEOUT mode, Unionfs creates a whiteout
X̄ using the create whiteout operation.
   For the unlink operation in DELETE ALL mode, Unionfs scans from right to
left, attempting to unlink the file in each branch, as shown in the lines 2–5.
This behavior is the most direct translation of a delete operation from a single-
branch file system. The delete operation moves in reverse precedence order,
from right to left. This ensures that if any delete operation fails, the user-
visible file system does not change. If any error occurred during the deletions,
a whiteout is created by calling the create whiteout procedure.
   Whiteouts are essential when Unionfs fails to unlink a file. Failure to delete
even one of the files or directories in the DELETE ALL mode results in exposing
the file name, even after a deletion operation. This would contradict Unix se-
mantics, so a whiteout needs to be created in a branch with a higher priority to
mask the files that were not successfully deleted.
                                       ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
86      •      C. Wright et al.

   Deleting directories in Unionfs is similar to unlinking files. Unionfs first
checks to see if the directory is empty. If any file exists without a corresponding
whiteout, Unionfs returns a “directory not empty” error (ENOTEMPTY). A
helper function, called isempty, returns true if a directory, D, is empty (i.e., a
user would not see any entries except . and ..).
   In the DELETE WHITEOUT mode, Unionfs first checks if the directory is empty. If
the directory is empty, then Unionfs creates a whiteout in the leftmost branch
where the source exists to hide the directory. Next, Unionfs removes both all
the whiteouts within the leftmost directory and the leftmost directory itself. If
the operation fails midway, our fsck will detect and repair any errors.
   The deletion operation for directories in DELETE ALL mode is similar to the
unlink operation in this mode. Unionfs first verifies if the directory is empty.
A whiteout entry is created to hide the directory, and as a flag for fsck in case
the machine crashes. Next, Unionfs scans the branches from right to left and
attempts to delete the lower-level directory and any whiteouts within it. If all
deletions succeed, then the whiteout is removed.


3.6 Rename
Renaming files is one of the most complex operations in any file system. It be-
comes even more complex in Unionfs, which involves renaming multiple source
files to multiple destination files—while still maintaining Unix semantics. Even
though a rename operation in Unionfs may involve multiple operations like
rename, unlink, create, copyup, and whiteout creation, Unionfs provides atom-
icity and consistency on the whole.
    For rename, the source S can exist in one or more branches and the des-
tination D can exist in zero or more branches. To maintain Unix semantics,
rename(S, D) must have the following two key properties: First, if rename suc-
ceeds, then S is renamed to D and S does not exist. Second, if rename fails, then
S remains unchanged, and if D existed before, then D remains unchanged.
    In general, rename is a combination of a link of the source file to the destina-
tion file and an unlink of the source file. So, rename has two different behaviors
based on the unlink mode: DELETE WHITEOUT and DELETE ALL (the latter is the
default mode).
    In the DELETE WHITEOUT mode, Unionfs only renames the leftmost occurrence
of the source and then hides any occurrences to the right with a whiteout. Using
the notation of Section 3.5, the procedure is as follows:
1 unionfs rename(S,D) { /* delete whiteout *
2   create whiteout for S
3   rename(S[L S ], D[L S ])
4   for i = L S − 1 downto L D
5     unlink(D[i])
6   }
    In line 2, Unionfs creates a whiteout for the source. This makes it appear as
if the source does not exist. In line 3, Unionfs then renames the leftmost source
file in its own branch. Next, Unionfs traverses from right to left, starting in
ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                  Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification             •     87

the branch that contains the leftmost source and ending in the leftmost branch
where the destination exists. If the destination file exists in a branch, then it
is removed.
    To maintain the two aforementioned key properties of rename, we make the
assumption that any lower-level rename operation performed can be undone,
though the overwritten file is lost. If any error occurs, we revert the files that
we have renamed. This means that the view that users see does not change
because the leftmost source and destination are preserved. During the Unionfs
rename operation, the source and destination directories are locked so that users
cannot view an inconsistent state. However, if an unclean shutdown occurs, the
file system may be in an inconsistent state. Our solution is to create a temporary
state file before the rename operation and then remove it afterward. Our high-
level fsck could then detect and repair any errors.
    Unionfs also supports rename in DELETE ALL mode. Using the notation of Sec-
tion 3.5, the procedure for rename in DELETE ALL mode is as follows:
1 union rename(S,D) {
2    for i = R S downto L S {
3      if (i != L D && S[i] exists)
4        rename(S[i], D[i])
5    }
6    for i = L S − 1 downto L D + 1
7        unlink(D[i])
8    if (S[L D ] exists)
9      rename(S[L D ], D[L D ]);
10 else if (L D < L S )
11     unlink(D[L D ])
12 }
    Lines 2–5 rename each source file to the destination, moving from right to
left. The if statement on line 3 skips the branch that contains the leftmost
destination (L D ), because if a subsequent lower-level operation were to fail, it
is not possible undo the rename in L D . Lines 6–7 are the second phase: The
destination file is removed in branches to the left of the leftmost source file
(L S ). This prevents higher-priority destination entries from hiding the new
data. Finally, the branch that contains the leftmost destination file is handled
(L D ) in lines 8–11. If the source file exists in the same branch as the leftmost
destination (L D ), then the lower-level source is renamed to the destination
in that branch. If this last operation succeeds, then the Unionfs rename op-
eration as a whole succeeds, otherwise the Unionfs rename operation fails. If
the source did not exist in the branch as the leftmost destination (L D ) and the
leftmost destination is to the left of the leftmost source (L D < L S ), then the
file is removed to prevent it from hiding the new data. Again, if this last op-
eration succeeds, then the Unionfs operation as a whole succeeds, otherwise
the Unionfs operation fails. If the Unionfs operation returns an error, we re-
vert the renamed files to their original name on the lower-level. This preserves
the property that rename should not change the users’ view if it returns an
error.
                                      ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
88      •      C. Wright et al.

   Unionfs handles read-only file system errors differently than other errors. If
a read-write operation is attempted in a read-only branch, then Unionfs copies
up the source file and attempts to rename it to the destination. To conserve space
and provide the essence of our algorithms without unnecessary complication,
we elided these checks from the previous examples.

3.7 Dynamic Branch Insertion/Deletion
Unionfs supports dynamic insertion and deletion of branches in any order, or in
any position. Unionfs’s inodes, dentries, superblock, and open files all have gen-
eration numbers. Whenever a new branch is added or removed, the superblock’s
generation number is incremented. To check the freshness of objects, the VFS
calls the revalidate and d revalidate methods on inodes and dentries, respec-
tively. If an object’s generation number does not match the superblock, then the
data structures are refreshed from the lower-level file systems and the gener-
ation number is updated. Refreshing objects is similar to instantiating a new
object, but updating the existing Unionfs structures because other kernel code
has references to them. To refresh a dentry or inode we use a special code path
in lookup, and to refresh an open file object we have code that is similar to
open.
    In most cases, Unionfs does not permit the removal of an in-use branch
(opening a file increments the branch’s reference count, and closing the file
decrements the count). However, when a process changes its working directory,
the VFS does not inform the file system. If a branch is removed while a process
is still using it as its working directory, then a new inode is created with an
operations vector filled with functions that return a “stale file handle” error.
This is similar to NFS semantics.
    The VFS provides methods for ensuring that both cached dentry and inode
objects are valid before it uses them. However, file objects have no such revali-
dation method. This shortcoming is especially acute for stackable file systems
because the upper-level file object is very much like a cache of the lower-level file
objects. In Unionfs this becomes important when a snapshot is taken. If the file
is not revalidated, then writes can continue to affect read-only branches. With
file revalidation, Unionfs detects that its branch configuration has changed and
updates the file object.
    Our current prototype of file-level revalidation is implemented at the entry
point of each Unionfs file method to allow Unionfs to operate with an unmodified
kernel. However, some simple system calls, such as fstat, read the file structure
without first validating its contents. Ideally, the VFS should revalidate file
objects so that this functionality is uniformly exposed to all file systems.

3.8 User-Space Utilities
Unionfs provides great flexibility to the user: Branches can be added and re-
moved, or their permissions can be changed. It is essential for the system ad-
ministrator to be able to manage branches easily. For efficiency, all branch man-
agement ioctls use branch numbers for management (e.g., remove branch n).
Users, however, find this type of interface cumbersome. Additionally, the branch
ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                  Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification             •     89

configuration of Unionfs can change continuously. For example, snapshots may
be taken (thereby adding branches) or merged (thereby removing branches).
   Unionfs provides a user-space utility, unionctl, that queries and manipu-
lates branches. Unionfs exposes its current branch configuration through the
/proc/mounts file. When unionctl is invoked, it reads /proc/mounts to identify
the union and its branches. Paths specified on the command line are converted
into branch numbers using this information. These branch numbers are then
passed to the corresponding ioctls.
   A simple shell script, snapmerge, merges several Unionfs snapshots. Merging
snapshots is advantageous, as it improves performance by limiting the number
of active branches and saves disk space because only the most recent version
of a file is kept. Finally, Unionfs includes a debugging utility to increase or
decrease logging levels, and to force the revalidation of all Unionfs objects.


3.9 Split-View Caches
Normally, the OS maintains a single view of the namespace for all users. This
limits new file system functionality that can be made available. For example,
in file cloaking, users only see the files that they have permission to access
[Spadavecchia and Zadok 2002]. This improves privacy and prevents users from
learning information about files they are not entitled to access. To implement
this functionality in a UID/GID range-mapping NFS server, caches have to
be bypassed. Unionfs can divert any process to an alternative view of the file
system. This functionality can be integrated with an IDS to create a sandboxing
file system. Using a filter provided by an IDS, Unionfs can direct good processes
to one view of the union, and bad processes to another view.
    In Linux, each mount point has an associated vfsmount structure. This struc-
ture points to the superblock that is mounted and its root dentry. It is possible
for multiple vfsmounts to point to a single superblock, but each vfsmount points
to only one superblock and root. When the VFS is performing a lookup operation
and comes across a mount point, there is an associated vfsmount structure. The
VFS simply dereferences the root dentry pointer, and follows it into the mounted
file system.
    To implement split-view caches, we modified the generic super operations
operations vector to include a new method, select super. Now, when the VFS
comes across a mount point, it invokes select super (if it is defined), which
returns the appropriate root entry to use for this operation. This simple yet
powerful new interface was accomplished with minimal VFS changes: only eight
new lines of core kernel code were added.
    Internally, Unionfs has to support multiple root dentries at once. To do this,
we create a parallel Unionfs view that is almost a completely independent file
system. The new view has its own superblock, dentries, and inodes. This creates
a parallel cache for each of the views. However, Unionfs uses the lower-level file
systems’ data cache so the actual data pages are not duplicated. This improves
performance and eliminates data cache coherency problems. The two views are
connected through the superblocks so that when the original Unionfs view is
unmounted, so are the new views.
                                      ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
90      •      C. Wright et al.

   Our current prototype uses a hard-coded algorithm for select super, though
we plan to create an interface for modules to register their own select super
algorithms.


4. RELATED WORK
We begin by describing the origins of fan-out file systems. Then, we briefly
describe four other representative unification systems. In Section 5 we compare
the features offered by each of these systems with Unionfs. We finally describe
snapshotting and sandboxing systems.
    Fan-Out File Systems. Rosenthal defined the concept of a fan-out file system,
and suggested possible applications, such as caching or fail-over [Rosenthal
1990]. However, Rosenthal only suggested these file systems as possible uses of
a versatile fan-out vnode interface, and did not build any fan-out file systems.
Additionally, Rosenthal’s stacking infrastructure required an overhaul of the
VFS. The Ficus replicated file system is a multilayer stackable fan-out file
system that supports replication [Guy et al. 1990; Heidemann and Popek 1994].
Ficus has two layers: a physical layer that manages a single replica and a
logical layer that manages several Ficus physical layer replicas. Ficus uses the
existing vnode interface, but overloads certain operations (e.g., looking up a
special name is used to signal a file open). Ficus was developed as a stackable
layer, but it does not make full use of the naming routines providing by existing
file systems. Ficus stores its own directory information within normal files,
which adds complexity to Ficus itself.
    In Unionfs, we have implemented an n-way fan-out file system for merging
the contents of directories using existing VFS interfaces.
    Plan 9. Plan 9, developed by Bell Labs, is a general-purpose distributed com-
puting environment that can connect different machines, file servers, and net-
works [AT&T Bell Laboratories 1995]. Resources in the network are treated
as files, each of which belongs to a particular namespace. A namespace is a
mapping associated with every directory or file name. Plan 9 offers a bind-
ing service that enables multiple directories to be grouped under a common
namespace. This is called a union directory. A directory can either be added
at the top or at the bottom of the union directory, or it can replace all the
existing members in the structure. In case of duplicate file instances, the oc-
currence closest to the top is chosen for modification from the list of member
directories.
    3-D File System (3DFS). 3DFS was developed by AT&T Bell Labs, primarily
for source code management [Korn and Krell 1990]. It maintains a per process
table that contains directories and a location in the file system that the direc-
tories overlay. This technique is called viewpathing, and it presents a view of
directories stacked over one another. In addition to current directory and parent
directory navigation, 3DFS introduces a special file name “...” that denotes a
third dimension of the file system and allows navigation across the directory
stack. 3DFS is implemented as user-level libraries, which often results in poor
performance [Zadok and Nieh 2000]; atomicity guarantees also become difficult,
as directory locking is not possible.
ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                  Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification             •     91

    TFS. The translucent file system (TFS) was released in SunOS 4.1 in 1989
[Hendricks 1990]. It provides a viewpathing solution like 3DFS. However, TFS
is an improvement over 3DFS, as it better adheres to Unix semantics when
deleting a file. TFS transparently creates a whiteout when deleting a file. All
directories except the topmost are read-only. During mount time, TFS creates a
file called .tfs_info in each mounted directory, which keeps sequence informa-
tion about the next mounted directory and a list of whiteouts in that directory.
Whenever the user attempts to modify files in the read-only directories, the
file and its parent directories are copied to the topmost directory. TFS is imple-
mented as a user-level NFS server that services all directory operations like
lookup, create, and unlink. TFS has a kernel-level component that handles
data operations like read and write on individual files. TFS was dropped from
later releases of SunOS. Today, the Berkeley Automounter Amd [Pendry et al.
2003] supports a TFS-like mode that unifies directories using a symbolic-link
shadow tree (symlinks point to the first occurrence of a duplicate file).
    4.4BSD Union Mounts. Union mounts, implemented on 4.4BSD-Lite [Pendry
and McKusick 1995], merge directories and their trees to provide a unified
view. This structure, called a union stack, permits directories to be dynamically
added either to the top or to the bottom of the view. Every lookup operation in
a lower layer creates a corresponding directory tree in the upper layer called
a shadow directory. This clutters the upper-layer directory and converts the
read-only lookup into a read-write operation. A request to modify a file in the
lower layers results in copying the file into its corresponding shadow directory.
The copied file inherits the permissions of the original file, except that the
owner of the file is the user who mounted the file system. A delete operation
creates a whiteout to mask all occurrences of the file in the lower layers. To
avoid consumption of inodes, union mounts make a special directory entry for
a whiteout without allocating an inode. Whiteouts are not allocated inodes in
order to save resources, but (ironically) shadow directories are created on every
lookup operation, consuming inodes unnecessarily.
    Snapshotting. There are several commercially and freely available snapshot-
ting systems such as FFS with SoftUpdates and WAFL [McKusick and Ganger
1999; Hitz et al. 1994; Peterson and Burns 2005]. These systems perform copy-
on-write when blocks change. Most of these systems require modifications to
existing file systems and the block layer. Clotho is a departure from most snap-
shotting systems in that it requires only block layer modifications [Flouris and
Bilas 2004]. Snapshotting with Unionfs is more flexible and portable than pre-
vious systems because it can stack on any existing file system (e.g., Ext2 or
NFS). Because Unionfs is stackable, snapshots could also be created per file, or
per file type.
    Sandboxing. Sandboxing is a collection of techniques to isolate one process
from the others on a machine. The chroot system call restricts the namespace
operations of some processes to a subset of the namespace. Jails extend chroot
to allow partitioning of networking and process control subsystems [Kamp and
Watson 2000]. Another form of sandboxing is to monitor system calls, and if
they deviate from a policy, to prevent them from being executed [Fraser et al.
1999].
                                      ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
92        •      C. Wright et al.

                                        Table I. Feature Comparison
         Feature                       Plan 9         3DFS               TFS             4.4BSD        Unionfs
     1   Unix semantics: Recursive                                                                    
            unification
     2   Unix semantics: Duplicate                User Library     User NFS Server      C Library       Kernel
            elimination level
     3   Unix semantics: Deleting                                                                       
            objects
     4   Unix semantics: Permission                                                                       a
            preservation on copyup
     5   Unix semantics: Unique                                                                           
            and persistent inode
            numbers
     6   Multiple writable branches                                                                      
     7   Dynamic insertion &                                                                           
            removal of the highest
            priority branch
     8   Dynamic insertion &                                                                              
            removal of any branch
     9   No file system type                                                              b
                                                                                                          
            restrictions
    10   Creating shadow                               c                                               c
            directories
    11   Copyup-on-write                                                                              d
    12   Whiteout support                              e                                               
    13   Snapshot support                                                                                 
    14   Sandbox support                                                                                  
    15   Implementation                  VFS          User         User NFS Server      Kernel FS     Kernel FS
         technique                      (stack)      Library       + Kernel helper       (stack)      (fan-out)
    16   Operating systems              Plan 9       Many f          SunOS 4.1           4.4BSD        Linux g
            supported
    17   Total LoC                      6,247h       16,078             16,613             3,997        11,853
    18   Customized functionality                                                                         

A check mark indicates that the feature is supported, otherwise it is not.
a
   Through a mount-time option, a copied-up file’s mode can be that of the original owner, the current user, or the
file system mounter.
b
   BSD union mounts allow only an FFS derivative to be the topmost layer.
c
   Lazy creation of shadow directories.
d
   Unionfs performs copyup only in case of a read-only branch.
e
   3DFS uses whiteouts only if explicitly specified.
 f
   3DFS supports many architectures: BSD, HP, IBM, Linux, SGI, Solaris, Cygwin, etc.
g
   Unionfs runs on Linux 2.4 and 2.6, but it is based on stackable templates which are available on three systems:
Linux, BSD, and Solaris.
h
   Since Plan 9’s union directories are integrated into the VFS, the LoC metric is based on an estimate of all
related code in the VFS.


5. FEATURE COMPARISON
In this section we present a comparison of our Unionfs with the four most
representative comparable systems: Plan 9 union directories, 3DFS, TFS, and
BSD union mounts. We identified the following eighteen features and metrics
of these systems, and we summarized them in Table I:
    (1) Unix semantics: Recursive unification: 3DFS, TFS, BSD union
        mounts, and Unionfs present a merged view of directories at every level.
        Plan 9 merges only the top level directories and not their subdirectories.

ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                  Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification             •     93

 (2) Unix semantics: Duplicate elimination level: 3DFS, TFS, and BSD
     union mounts eliminate duplicate names at the user level, whereas
     Unionfs eliminates duplicates at the kernel level. Plan 9 union directories
     do not eliminate duplicate names. Elimination at the kernel level means
     that Unionfs can be used with multiple C libraries and statically-linked
     applications, and exported to any type of NFS client.
 (3) Unix semantics: Deleting objects: TFS, BSD union mounts, and
     Unionfs adhere to Unix semantics by ensuring that a successful deletion
     does not expose objects in lower layers. However, Plan 9 and 3DFS delete
     the object only in the highest-priority layer, possibly exposing duplicate
     objects.
 (4) Unix semantics: Permission preservation on copyup: All file systems
     except Unionfs do not fully adhere to Unix semantics. BSD union mounts
     make the user who mounted the Union the owner of the copied-up file,
     whereas in other systems a copied-up file is owned by the current user.
     Unionfs, by default, preserves the owner on a copyup. Unionfs supports
     other modes that change ownership on a copyup, as described in Section 2.
 (5) Unix semantics: Unique and persistent inode numbers: Only
     Unionfs supports unique and persistent inodes during lookup and direc-
     tory reading. This allows applications to identify a file reliably, using its
     device and inode numbers. Persistent inode numbers also make it possible
     for NFS file handles to survive reboots.
 (6) Multiple writable branches: Unionfs allows files to be directly modified
     in any branch. Unionfs attempts to avoid the frequent copyups that occur
     in other systems and avoids the shadow directory creation that clutters the
     highest-priority branch. This improves performance. Plan 9 union directo-
     ries can have multiple writable components, but Plan 9 does not perform
     recursive unification, so only the top-level directory supports this feature.
     Other systems only allow the leftmost branch to be writable.
 (7) Dynamic insertion and removal of the highest priority branch: All
     systems except TFS support removal of the highest-priority branch. BSD
     union mounts can only remove branches in the reverse order in which they
     were mounted.
 (8) Dynamic insertion and removal of any branch: Only Unionfs can
     dynamically insert or remove a branch anywhere in the union.
 (9) No file system type restrictions: BSD union mounts require the top-
     most layer to be an FFS derivative which supports on-disk whiteout direc-
     tory entries. Other systems including Unionfs have no such restriction.
(10) Creating shadow directories: 3DFS and TFS create shadow directo-
     ries on write operations in read-only branches. BSD union mounts create
     shadow directories in the leftmost branch, even on lookup, to prepare for
     a possible copyup operation; this, however, clutters the highest-priority
     branch with unnecessary directories, and turns a read-only operation into
     a read-write operation. Unionfs creates shadow directories only on write
     operations and on error conditions such as ‘read-only file system” (EROFS).

                                      ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
94      •      C. Wright et al.

(11) Copyup-on-write: Plan 9 union directories do not support copyup. 3DFS,
     TFS, BSD union mounts, and Unionfs can copy a file from a read-only
     branch to a higher-priority writable branch.
(12) Whiteout support: Plan 9 does not support whiteouts. 3DFS creates
     whiteouts only if manually specified by the user. BSD union mounts, TFS,
     and Unionfs create whiteouts transparently.
(13) Snapshot support: Only Unionfs is suitable for snapshotting, because
     it supports file-object revalidation, unifies recursively, adheres to Unix
     deletion semantics, allows dynamic insertion of branches, lazily creates
     shadow directories, and preserves attributes on copyup.
(14) Sandbox support: Only Unionfs supports sandboxing processes.
(15) Implementation technique: Plan 9 union directories are built into the
     VFS layer. 3DFS is implemented as a user-level library; whereas it re-
     quires no kernel changes, applications must be linked with the library
     to work. Such user-level implementations often suffer from poor perfor-
     mance. TFS is a user-space localhost NFS server that works with standard
     NFS clients. Running in user-space increases portability, but decreases
     performance. TFS has a kernel level component for performance, but that
     reduces its portability. BSD union mounts is a kernel-level stackable file
     system with a linear stack, whereas Unionfs is a kernel-level stackable
     file system with an n-way fan-out. Stackable file systems have better per-
     formance than user-space file systems and are easier to develop than disk-
     based or network-based file systems [Zadok and Nieh 2000].
(16) Operating systems supported: 3DFS comes with a customized C library
     for several systems: BSD, HPUX, AIX, Linux, IRIX, Solaris, and Cygwin.
     Plan 9 is an operating system by itself. TFS was supported on SunOS 4.1.
     BSD union mounts are implemented on 4.4BSD and current derivatives
     (e.g., FreeBSD). Unionfs runs on Linux, but since it is based on stacking
     templates, it can easily be ported to Solaris and BSD.
(17) Total LoC: The number of Lines of Code (LoC) in the file system is a good
     measure of maintainability, complexity, and the amount of initial effort
     required to write the system. Plan 9 union directories are built into the
     VFS; therefore, its LoC metric is an approximate estimate based on the
     most related code in the VFS. 3DFS has a relatively high LoC count be-
     cause it comes with its own set of C library functions. TFS’s LoC metric
     accounts for both its user-level NFS server and kernel component. The
     LoC metric for Unionfs (snapshot 061205-0016) and BSD union mounts,
     both implemented in the kernel, is considerably less than the user-level
     implementations. Unionfs has a larger LoC than BSD union mounts be-
     cause it supports more features. The Unionfs LoC includes 804 lines of
     user-space management utilities.
(18) Customized functionality: Unionfs has a flexible design that pro-
     vides several modes of operation using mount-time options. For exam-
     ple, Unionfs allows users to choose the mode and the permissions of the
     copied-up files, with COPYUP OWNER, COPYUP CONST, and COPYUP CURRENT, as

ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                     Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification             •     95

     described in Section 2. Unionfs also provides two modes for deleting ob-
     jects: DELETE ALL and DELETE WHITEOUT, as described in Section 3.5.

6. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
We evaluate the performance of our system by executing various general-
purpose benchmarks and microbenchmarks. Previous unification file systems
are either considerably older or run on different operating systems. Therefore,
we do not compare Unionfs’s performance with other systems.
   We conducted all tests on a 1.7GHz Pentium-IV with 1152MB of RAM. The
machine ran Fedora Core 3 with all updates as of May 17, 2005. We used Unionfs
snapshot 061205-0016. All experiments were located on a dedicated 250 GB
Maxtor IDE disk. To overcome the ZCAV effect, the test partition was located
on the outer cylinders of the disk and was just large enough to accommodate
the test data [Ellard and Seltzer 2003]. We chose Ext2 as the base file system
because it is widely used and well-tested. To ensure a cold cache, we unmounted
the underlying file system between each iteration of a benchmark. For all tests,
we computed the 95% confidence intervals for the mean elapsed, system, and
user time, using the Student-t distribution. In each case, the half-widths of the
intervals for elapsed and system time were less than 5% of the mean. For some
experiments, user time was a small component of the overall experiment, and
in these cases the half-width was either below 5% of the mean, or less than
10ms (the accuracy at which user time is measured).

6.1 Configurations
We used the following two operating modes for our tests:

— DALL uses the DELETE ALL mount-time option that deletes each occurrence of
  a file or a directory.
— DWHT uses the DELETE WHITEOUT mount-time option that creates whiteouts on
  a call to rename, unlink, or rmdir.

We used the following two data distribution methods:

— DIST distributes files and directories evenly across branches with no duplicate
  files. If two files in the same directory are distributed to different branches,
  then their parent directory is duplicated.
— DUP replicates each file and directory to every branch.

   We conducted tests for all combinations of the aforementioned parameters for
one, two, four, eight, and sixteen branches. We selected these branch numbers in
order to study the performance of the system under different load conditions;
one-branch tests were conducted to ensure that Unionfs did not have a high
performance overhead compared with similar tests on Ext2; sixteen-branch
tests, on the other hand, test the scalability of the system under high workloads;
intermediate configurations help examine Unionfs performance on moderate
workloads.

                                         ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
96      •      C. Wright et al.




                      Fig. 2. Postmark: 20,000 files and 200,000 transactions.

6.2 General Purpose Benchmarks
We chose two representative general-purpose workloads: (1) Postmark, an I/O-
intensive benchmark [Katcher 1997], and (2) a CPU-intensive compile bench-
mark, building the OpenSSH package [OpenBSD 2005]. To provide comparable
results, we selected the number of Ext2 directories based on the number of un-
derlying Unionfs branches.
    Postmark focuses on stressing the file system by performing a series of file
system operations such as directory look ups, creations, and deletions on small
files. A large number of small files is common in electronic mail and news
servers where multiple users are randomly modifying small files. We config-
ured Postmark to create 20,000 files and perform 200,000 transactions; these
are commonly recommended parameters [Katcher 1997]. We used 200 subdi-
rectories to prevent linear directory look ups from dominating the results.
    The OpenSSH build (version 4.0p1) contains 74,259 lines of code. It performs
several hundred small configuration tests, and then it builds 155 object files,
one library, eleven binaries, and four scripts. This benchmark contains a fair
mix of file system operations, representing a typical performance impact for
users.
    Figure 2 shows the elapsed and system time for Postmark in the DWHT and
DALL modes. The results for DALL stayed relatively constant as the number of
branches increased, demonstrating Unionfs’s scalability. The elapsed time over-
heads for DALL are in the range of 8.5–15.9% above that of Ext2. DWHT, however,
has a higher elapsed time overhead of 24.4% for a single branch. This over-
head is higher than DALL for two reasons. First, whiteout creation requires
two steps: renaming the file and then truncating it. Second, all directory op-
erations consume more time because look ups take longer as the number of
directory entries increases. Interestingly, as the number of branches increases,
the overhead of DWHT actually decreases. For two branches, the overhead is
9.2%, and for sixteen branches, the results are actually faster than Ext2 by
14%. This result was unexpected, so we investigated it further. With DWHT the
time taken to write data to disk decreases significantly. With sixteen branches,
the number of sectors written decreased by 46.9%, the number of individual
write operations decreased by 45.5%, and the total amount of time spent writ-
ing decreased by 52.9%. We verified that our code’s performance characteristics
ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                   Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification                •     97




               Fig. 3. Cylinder groups accessed by n consecutive operations.


were not anomalous by modifying Postmark to simulate the whiteout deletion
mode directly on Ext2.
    To better understand this behavior, we profiled Postmark using a tool that we
developed called FSprof [Joukov et al. 2004]. FSprof instruments file systems
to count the number of calls to each operation and their total latency. The most
striking differences between the profiles was that the delete inode operation
took 72% less time on DWHT than on Ext2; and the writepages also decreased by
53%. The delete inode operation was significantly faster because with DWHT, no
inodes are deallocated during the transactions phase of Postmark (they are con-
verted to whiteouts instead). After the transactions phase, Postmark deletes all
remaining files and directories. While deleting these directories, DWHT removes
any whiteout entries in them. Because all of the whiteouts are deleted at once,
the disk blocks containing the inodes only need to be written once because of
improved temporal locality.
    The behavior of writepages is a bit more complicated. The number of calls
to writepages increased, but the time spent decreased. This means that each
individual writepage call must have spent less time. The bulk of time in a
writepage operation is spent positioning the disk head, so this would indicate
that the files within DWHT have better locality than in Ext2. To verify this theory,
we modified Postmark to record the Ext2 inode numbers of files that were
created by Ext2 and Unionfs. Using the Ext2 inode number, we could determine
the cylinder group that the file was allocated in. We then computed the number
of cylinder groups that n consecutive operations spanned. If fewer cylinder
groups are used, then better locality is exhibited. Figure 3 compares the number
of consecutive operations with the mean number of cylinder groups accessed
for DWHT and Ext2. For 80 or more consecutive operations DWHT used fewer
cylinder groups. For 1,000 operations, Ext2 used 50 cylinder groups, whereas
DWHT used only 31. Ext2 attempts to create new files in the same cylinder group
as their parent directory. Because Postmark creates many files, they do not all
fit within a cylinder group and are spread across the disk. After a file is deleted,
however, its place can be taken by a new file. In DWHT, on the other hand, files
are not deleted, so the full cylinder group cannot be reused. This forces Ext2 to
allocate all of the new files in the same cylinder group, rather than going back
to a previously full cylinder group, thereby improving locality.
                                          ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
98      •      C. Wright et al.

                                Table II. Postmark with Snapshots on
                                 Unionfs. Elapsed Time Overhead is
                                          Compared to Ext2
                               Interval(s)      Snapshots    Overhead
                                   15              12.4        79.8%
                                   30               5.1        42.9%
                                   60               3          34.4%


   The results for all of our OpenSSH compile benchmarks have overheads
ranging from 0.2–1.5% for elapsed time and 1.1–6.2% for system time. Postmark
and the OpenSSH compile both show that most users are unlikely to notice a
performance degradation when using Unionfs.
   Snapshots. We also ran OpenSSH and Postmark while taking snapshots ev-
ery 60, 30, and 15 seconds. OpenSSH had an elapsed time overhead of 2.4–3.3%
over Ext2 for all intervals. On average, 2.0, 4.0, and 7.1 snapshots were taken
for intervals of 60, 30, and 15 seconds, respectively. This demonstrates that
Unionfs efficiently performs snapshots for user-like workloads. Table II shows
the Postmark results. Elapsed time overheads ranged from 34.4–79.8%. Post-
mark is a more I/O-intensive workload, and therefore, each snapshot causes
more data to be copied to the highest-priority branch. Additionally, because
each snapshot increases the total number of files, directory operations such as
create, unlink, and lookup take more time. This suggests that merging snap-
shots periodically would be beneficial.

6.3 Microbenchmarks
Unionfs modifies basic file system operations like lookup, readdir, unlink, and
rmdir. We conducted the following three microbenchmarks on Unionfs to eval-
uate the overhead of these operations:
— STAT evaluates the overhead of lookup by running stat on each file and
  directory.
— READDIR reads all the directories using readdir.
— UNLINK evaluates the overhead of the unlink and rmdir operations by un-
  linking each file in the system (if unlink returns EISDIR, then we use rmdir).
   For all of the microbenchmarks, we used a precomputed list of files and direc-
tories. This avoids using readdir and stat to determine what files or directories
to operate on.
   We used 100 copies of the OpenSSH 4.0p1 distribution as our data set. The
data set had a total of 1,300 directories with 40,000 files that took 472 MB of
disk space. For the distributed data set, the number of files remained constant,
but there were duplicated directories. For the duplicated set, each branch had
a copy of all files and directories.

   STAT. Figure 4 shows the benchmark results for STAT. For a single branch,
Unionfs has an overhead of 33.7% over Ext2. This is because Unionfs must
look up both the file and its whiteout. A Unionfs lookup operation with a DIST
distribution scans all the branches from left to right until it finds the file. So,
ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                   Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification                 •     99




                                 Fig. 4.    STAT results.




                                Fig. 5.    READDIR results.


there is an expected linear increase in the elapsed time by a factor of 2.3 for
two branches over a single branch, 4.0 for four branches, 6.8 for eight branches,
and 10.8 for sixteen branches. On the other hand, for a DUP data distribution,
the overhead for two branches over a single branch is a factor of 2.1, for four
branches the overhead is a factor of 7.5, for eight branches the factor of 17.3
times, and for sixteen branches a factor of 32.7. This overhead is mainly caused
by look ups on directories. Indeed, if a single directory of 10,000 files is used in-
stead of the OpenSSH data set, then the overhead is 1.2% for two branches and
it increases to only 23.9% for sixteen branches because the lookup procedure
terminates after the first branch for files.
   Most of this overhead is I/O. With a cold cache, the benchmark took from 5.9–
213 seconds. With a warm cache, the benchmark took 0.2 seconds for Ext2, and
0.3–1.6 seconds for Unionfs. We believe that the warm cache results are closer
to most user workloads, because most files are accessed multiple times [Roselli
et al. 2000].

   READDIR. Figure 5 shows the benchmark results for READDIR. For a single
branch, Unionfs has an overhead of 38.7% over Ext2. This overhead is due to
the additional state that must be maintained, and additional layers of function
calls. A Unionfs readdir with a DIST distribution scans all the branches from
left to right, listing the contents of the directories. Because each underlying
directory contains fewer files, it examines the same number of entries as Ext2
                                           ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
100       •      C. Wright et al.




                                         Fig. 6.   UNLINK results.



(if you ignore duplicated directories), but the disk head must still seek to read
each of the n small directories. So, again, there is an expected linear increase in
the elapsed time by a factor of 2.5 for two branches over a single branch, 4.3 for
four branches, 6.5 for eight branches, and 10.4 for sixteen branches. Similary, for
a DUP data distribution, Unionfs must physically read n directories from the disk
for an n branch configuration. Additionally, the directories will be as large as be-
fore and duplicate elimination must be performed. For a single branch, the over-
head is 20.8%. The overhead for two branches over a single branch is a factor of
3.7, 7.4 for four branches, 16.1 for eight branches, and 29.5 for sixteen branches.
    Most of this overhead is I/O. Indeed, to perform the test on sixteen duplicate
copies of the data set on Ext2 took 14.0 times as long as to read a single copy.
For a sixteen-branch Unionfs configuration with duplicated data, this trans-
lates into an overhead of 124.6% over Ext2 with sixteen duplicated data sets.
With a cold cache, the benchmark took 5.7–203 seconds. With a warm cache,
the benchmark completed in 0.06 seconds for Ext2, and 0.10–1.45 seconds for
Unionfs. We believe that the warm cache performance is closer to user work-
loads, because directories are usually accessed multiple times.

   UNLINK Benchmark. Figure 6 shows the benchmark results for our UNLINK
microbenchmark. With a DALL configuration on a distributed data set, the mean
elapsed time increases by 5.0%, from 12.51 seconds for Ext2 to 13.15 seconds
for a single branch Unionfs. This increase is due to a system time increase from
0.06 seconds to 3.93 seconds. When additional branches are added, the elapsed
time increases for three reasons. First, lookup operations must be performed in
branches to the right of the file’s first occurrence (which requires reading those
entire directories). Second, before removing a directory, Unionfs must read the
directory in each branch to ensure that it is empty. Third, directories must be
deleted in multiple branches. A union with two branches had a 74% elapsed
time overhead when compared to a single branch; four branches were slower
by a factor of 2.5; eight branches were slower by a factor of 4.8, and sixteen
branches were slower by a factor of 7.3.
   With a DWHT configuration, the mean elapsed time increases by 12.32%, from
12.51 seconds to 14.06 seconds; again, primarily because of an increase in


ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                  Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification            •      101

system time. The reason that DWHT took more time than DALL for this config-
uration is that it is implemented as a rename, which consists of two distinct
directory operations (adding an entry for the new name and removing the old
name). Because DALL only performs one directory operation, it uses less time.
For additional branches, the elapsed time increases at a slower rate than for
DALL. This is because directories do not have to be deleted in all branches, and
lookup does not need to be called in lower-priority branches. Overheads over
a single branch are 43% for two branches, a factor of 2.3 for four branches, a
factor of 4.8 for eight branches, and a factor of 6.9 for sixteen branches. The
overhead increases as the number of branches increases because readdir is
called to verify that the directory is logically empty (i.e., every lower-level entry
has a corresponding higher-priority whiteout).
   For a DUP distribution with DALL, the overhead for additional branches is
greater than for the DIST data distribution. The increase is caused by three
factors. First, to determine if a directory is empty, more entries need to be read.
Second, before removing a file, Unionfs must perform lookup operations in all
of the branches except the leftmost. Third, to delete a single file, unlink must
be performed in each branch. For two branches, the elapsed time increases by
a factor of 2.5. Most of this overhead, 91%, was caused by additional I/O. For
four branches the overhead is a factor of 5.7, for eight branches the overhead
is a factor of 13.5, and for sixteen branches the overhead is a factor of 31.9.
The reason for such a high overhead for sixteen branches is that Unionfs must
actually perform many operations, including more I/O-bound operations. We
constructed a similar benchmark for Ext2 that removes two, four, eight, and
sixteen copies of our data set. The overhead of Unionfs compared to this Ext2
test was 47–83% for 2–16 branches.
   With a DWHT configuration, the mean elapsed time increases by 45% from
12.51 seconds to 18.21 seconds. The overhead over a single branch is 70.9%
for two branches, a factor of 3.2 for four branches, a factor of 6.5 for eight
branches, and a factor of 12.1 for sixteen branches. The overhead is less than
for DALL because lookup and directory operations are not required in lower-
priority branches. As the number of branches increases, overhead increases
because more directory-reading operations need to be performed to verify that
directories are logically empty. When compared to removing the files on Ext2,
the overhead is 22.7% for two branches. For four or more branches, DWHT is
faster than deleting the files on Ext2 because fewer namespace operations are
required. The improvement is 12.6% for four branches, 15.2% for eight branches,
and 26.8% for sixteen branches.
   The aforementioned benchmarks helped us evaluate the performance of
all the features that Unionfs provides. Our general benchmarks show that
Unionfs has small user-visible overheads, even for an I/O-intensive benchmark
like Postmark. Our microbenchmarks bring out the worst case Unionfs oper-
ations. We show that Unionfs has acceptable overheads, and particularly for
expensive operations, we illustrate that performing the same underlying op-
erations on multiple copies of the data with a plain Ext2 file-system is also
expensive.


                                       ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
102       •      C. Wright et al.

7. CONCLUSIONS
We have designed, implemented, and released Unionfs, a namespace unification
file system that is both versatile and adheres to Unix semantics. Our perfor-
mance evaluation shows that Unionfs has a small overhead for typical user-like
workloads, and our microbenchmarks show that Unionfs has acceptable worst-
case performance.
    Unionfs is the first implementation of an n-way stackable fan-out unification
file system. All underlying branches are directly accessed by Unionfs which
allows it to be more intelligent and efficient. Unionfs supports a mix of read-only
and read-write branches, features not previously supported on any unification
file system. Unionfs also supports the dynamic addition and deletion of any
branch of any precedence, whereas previous systems only allowed the highest or
lowest precedence branch to be added or removed. Unionfs’s flexibility and VFS
enhancements allow it to be used for new applications, such as snapshotting and
sandboxing, where namespace unification systems have not previously been
applied.
    Unionfs has been directly downloaded by thousands users in the last
six months and is widely used in eighteen different Linux distributions,
and because of this we have been able to identify and solve previously
unidentified problems. For example, Unionfs has efficient in-kernel duplicate
elimination with support for NFS. Unionfs also has support for unique and
persistent inode numbers with a space overhead of less than one-quarter of a
percent.
    Even though operations may fail on any one of the underlying branches,
Unionfs maintains Unix semantics. For deletion operations, Unionfs operates
from low-precedence to high-precedence branches in order to leave the user-
level view unmodified until the operation is guaranteed to succeed. We carefully
ordered operations in order to return success or failure to the user atomically
and to leave the file system in a consistent state.

7.1 Future Work
For operations that manipulate the namespace, Unionfs currently uses
     n
O(i=1  ti ) algorithms, where ti is time it takes to complete the operation on
branch i and n is the number of branches, because operations are performed
serially on each branch. With only a handful of branches, this performs rea-
sonably well (as demonstrated in Section 6), but as the number of branches
increases, performance begins to suffer. This is especially acute when branches
are added automatically (e.g., in a snapshotting system). We plan to create a
parallelized Unionfs in which a pool of worker threads will be available to per-
form operations. Unionfs will begin execution of all operations, and then process
the results after they complete. This scheme will allow the individual I/O op-
erations to be interleaved, resulting in performance in O(max(t0 , . . . , tn )). This
could be particularly useful if the underlying branches use physically different
disks. For read-only operations like lookup, all of the worker threads can be
started at once. However, for operations such as unlink, there will be a small
number of synchronization points at which the next operation depends on the
ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                 Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification            •      103

result of the previous operation (e.g, a whiteout should be created only if there
are read-only file-system errors).
   Unionfs maintains handles to lower-level file-system objects in the private
data of its in-kernel structures. Currently, accessing the underlying file-systems
causes cache incoherences with Unionfs because objects may cease to exist or
be inserted without Unionfs’s knowledge. Our revalidation method refreshes
Unionfs’s caches when branches are added or removed. We plan to extend the
revalidation method to verify that an object (and its parents) are kept up-to-
date. If a lower-level object (or its parent) changes, then we will refresh the
Unionfs cache.
   For operations on file data, Unionfs is completely bypassed and the lower-
level file system is consulted. This method of accessing data yields performance
equal to that of the lower-level file system for memory-mapped operations, and
performance quite close to the lower level file system for standard read and
write operations. Additionally, because data is only cached at the lower level
there, are fewer cache coherency issues. Unfortunately, Unionfs is not notified
of memory-mapped writes in this architecture, therefore, writable shared map-
pings can be changed after a snapshot. We will improve Unionfs to use its own
set of memory-mapping operations so that it is notified of all memory-mapped
writes. To ensure that performance is not hurt, we will use a page flipping tech-
nique so that caching is only performed on the Unionfs level. There are also
two implementation details that motivate us to use our own memory-mapped
operations. First, the /proc file system on Linux uses the memory-mapped re-
gion of the current executable to return its pathname, so the lower-level path
name is returned when reading from /proc/self/exe. Second, the sendfile
system call requires a matching file structure and address space structure. As
Unionfs presently has no address space structure, we cannot properly imple-
ment sendfile, which is required for loop device mounts and improves perfor-
mance for Web and NFS servers.
   Unionfs’s persistent inode maps provide the basis for NFS file handles that
will survive remounts and reboots. To support persistent NFS file handles,
Unionfs must be modified to read the lower-level inode in our own read inode
operation, and to find the parent of a given directory. Reading the lower-level
inode is a relatively straightforward change. Determining the parent of a direc-
tory is more difficult, because each Unionfs directory maps to several lower-level
directories. Unionfs can obtain a properly initialized and connected dentry from
an inode using the following method. The basic idea is to walk from a given in-
ode up to the Unionfs root, and then walk back down to the proper dentry.
First, using the Unionfs inode number and the forward map, Unionfs can get
the lower-level inode. Given this inode, Unionfs can look up .. to obtain the
lower-level parent. We can then use the reverse map to obtain the Unionfs in-
ode number. This process is repeated until we find the root Unionfs inode. After
we obtain the root Unionfs inode, we can walk back down the path to populate
each directory entry by reading the parent directory to find the child entries
(this type of search is similar to generic Linux export operations).
   Finally, there are two features that we have described in our design but
have not yet implemented: (1) a fsck program for Unionfs, and (2) creating a
                                      ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
104       •      C. Wright et al.

state file during rename for fsck. We plan to implement these features in the
future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Software and documentation are available from http://unionfs.filesystems.org.
The source code for all benchmarks and the scripts we used in the evaluation
section are available at www.fsl.cs.sunysb.edu/ cwright/unionfs-tos/.

REFERENCES

AT&T BELL LABORATORIES. 1995. Plan 9—Programmer’s Manual. AT&T Bell Laboratories.
ELLARD, D. AND SELTZER, M. 2003. NFS tricks and benchmarking traps. In Proceedings of the
  Annual USENIX Technical Conference, FREENIX Track (San Antonio, Tex.), 101–114.
FLOURIS, M. D. AND BILAS, A. 2004. Clotho: Transparent data versioning at the block I/O level.
  In Proceedings of the 12th NASA Goddard, 21st IEEE Conference on Mass Storage Systems and
  Technologies (MSST 2004). College Park, Md. 315–328.
FRASER, T., BADGER, L., AND FELDMAN, M. 1999. Hardening COTS software with generic software
  wrappers. In Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2–16.
GUY, R. G., HEIDEMANN, J. S., MAK, W., PAGE JR., T. W., POPEK, G. J., AND ROTHMEIER, D. 1990. Imple-
  mentation of the Ficus replicated file system. In Proceedings of the Summer USENIX Technical
  Conference, 63–71.
HEIDEMANN, J. S. AND POPEK, G. J. 1994. File system development with stackable layers. ACM
  Trans. Comput. Syst. 12, 1 (Feb.), 58–89.
HENDRICKS, D. 1990. A filesystem for software development. In Proceedings of the USENIX Sum-
  mer Conference (Anaheim, Calif.), 333–340.
HITZ, D., LAU, J., AND MALCOLM, M. 1994. File system design for an NFS file server appliance. In
  Proceedings of the USENIX Winter Technical Conference (San Francisco, Calif.), 235–245.
JOUKOV, N., WRIGHT, C. P., AND ZADOK, E. 2004. FSprof: An in-kernel file system opera-
  tions profiler. Tech. Rep. FSL-04-06, Computer Science Department, Stony Brook University.
  www.fsl.cs.sunysb.edu/docs/aggregate stats-tr/aggregate stats.pdf.
KAMP, P. H. AND WATSON, R. N. M. 2000. Jails: Confining the omnipotent root. In Proceedings of the
  2nd International System Administration and Networking Conference (SANE2000). Maastricht,
  The Netherlands.
KATCHER, J. 1997. PostMark: A new filesystem benchmark. Tech. Rep. TR3022, Network Appli-
  ance. www.netapp.com/tech library/3022.html.
KORN, D. G. AND KRELL, E. 1990. A new dimension for the Unix file system. Softw. Prac. Expe.,
  19–34.
MCKUSICK, M. K. AND GANGER, G. R. 1999. Soft updates: A technique for eliminating most syn-
  chronous writes in the fast filesystem. In Proceedings of the Annual USENIX Technical Confer-
  ence, FREENIX Track (Monterey, Calif.), 1–18.
OPENBSD. 2005. OpenSSH. www.openssh.org.
PENDRY, J. S. AND MCKUSICK, M. K. 1995. Union mounts in 4.4BSD-Lite. In Proceedings of the
  USENIX Technical Conference on UNIX and Advanced Computing Systems, 25–33.
PENDRY, J. S., WILLIAMS, N., AND ZADOK, E. 2003. Am-utils User Manual, 6.1b3 ed. www.am-utils.
  org.
PETERSON, Z. AND BURNS, R. 2005. Ext3cow: A time-shifting file system for regulatory compliance.
  Trans. Storage 1, 2, 190–212.
ROSELLI, D., LORCH, J. R., AND ANDERSON, T. E. 2000. A comparison of file system workloads. In
  Proceedings of the Annual USENIX Technical Conference (San Diego, Calif.), 41–54.
ROSENTHAL, D. S. H. 1990. Evolving the Vnode interface. In Proceedings of the Summer USENIX
  Technical Conference, 107–18.
SPADAVECCHIA, J. AND ZADOK, E. 2002. Enhancing NFS cross-administrative domain access. In
  Proceedings of the Annual USENIX Technical Conference, FREENIX Track (Monterey, Calif.),
  181–194.

ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
                       Versatility and Unix Semantics in Namespace Unification                  •      105

WRIGHT, C. P., MARTINO, M., AND ZADOK, E. 2003. NCryptfs: A secure and convenient cryptographic
  file system. In Proceedings of the Annual USENIX Technical Conference (San Antonio, Tex.), 197–
  210.
ZADOK, E. AND NIEH, J. 2000. FiST: A language for stackable file systems. In Proceedings of the
  Annual USENIX Technical Conference (San Diego, Calif.), 55–70.

Received June 2005; revised July 2005; accepted July 2005




                                                  ACM Transactions on Storage, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 2006.
